<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>II</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>Niafer</i>
			</h4>
			<p>The first thing of all that Manuel did, was to fill a knapsack with simple and nutritious food, and then he went to the gray mountain called Vraidex, upon the remote and cloud-wrapped summit of which dread Miramon Lluagor dwelt, in a doubtful palace wherein the lord of the nine sleeps contrived illusions and designed the dreams of men. When Manuel had passed under some very old maple-trees, and was beginning the ascent, he found a smallish, flat-faced, dark-haired boy going up before him.</p>
			<p>“Hail, snip,” says Manuel, “and whatever are you doing in this perilous place?”</p>
			<p>“Why, I am going,” the dark-haired boy replied, “to find out how the Lady Gisèle d’Arnaye is faring on the tall top of this mountain.”</p>
			<p>“Oho, then we will undertake this adventure together, for that is my errand too. And when the adventure is fulfilled, we will fight together, and the survivor will have the wealth and broad lands and the Count’s daughter to sit on his knee. What do they call you, friend?”</p>
			<p>“I am called Niafer. But I believe that the Lady Gisèle is already married, to Miramon Lluagor. At least, I sincerely hope she is married to this great magician, for otherwise it would not be respectable for her to be living with him at the top of this gray mountain.”</p>
			<p>“Fluff and puff! what does that matter?” says Manuel. “There is no law against a widow’s remarrying forthwith: and widows are quickly made by any champion about whom the wise Norns are already talking. But I must not tell you about that, Niafer, because I do not wish to appear boastful. So I must simply say to you, Niafer, that I am called Manuel, and have no other title as yet, being not yet even a baron.”</p>
			<p>“Come now,” says Niafer, “but you are rather sure of yourself for a young boy!”</p>
			<p>“Why, of what may I be sure in this shifting world if not of myself?”</p>
			<p>“Our elders, Manuel, declare that such self-conceit is a fault, and our elders, they say, are wiser than we.”</p>
			<p>“Our elders, Niafer, have long had the management of this world’s affairs, and you can see for yourself what they have made of these affairs. What sort of a world is it, I ask you, in which time peculates the gold from hair and the crimson from all lips, and the north wind carries away the glow and glory and contentment of October, and a driveling old magician steals a lovely girl? Why, such maraudings are out of reason, and show plainly that our elders have no notion how to manage things.”</p>
			<p>“Eh, Manuel, and will you re-model the world?”</p>
			<p>“Who knows?” says Manuel, in the high pride of his youth. “At all events, I do not mean to leave it unaltered.”</p>
			<p>Then Niafer, a more prosaic person, gave him a long look compounded equally of admiration and pity, but Niafer did not dispute the matter. Instead, these two pledged constant fealty until they should have rescued Madame Gisèle.</p>
			<p>“Then we will fight for her,” says Manuel, again.</p>
			<p>“First, Manuel, let me see her face, and then let me see her state of mind, and afterward I will see about fighting you. Meanwhile, this is a very tall mountain, and the climbing of it will require all the breath which we are wasting here.”</p>
			<p>So the two began the ascent of Vraidex, by the winding road upon which the dreams traveled when they were sent down to men by the lord of the seven madnesses. All gray rock was the way at first. But they soon reached the gnawed bones of those who had ascended before them, scattered about a small plain that was overgrown with ironweed: and through and over the tall purple blossoms came to destroy the boys the Serpent of the East, a very dreadful design with which Miramon afflicted the sleep of Lithuanians and Tartars. The snake rode on a black horse, a black falcon perched on his head, and a black hound followed him. The horse stumbled, the falcon clamored, the hound howled.</p>
			<p>Then said the snake: “My steed, why do you stumble? my hound, why do you howl? and, my falcon, why do you clamor? For these three doings foresay some ill to me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, a great ill!” replies Manuel, with his charmed sword already half out of the scabbard.</p>
			<p>But Niafer cried: “An endless ill is foresaid by these doings. For I have been to the Island of the Oaks: and under the twelfth oak was a copper casket, and in the casket was a purple duck, and in the duck was an egg: and in the egg, O Norka, was and is your death.”</p>
			<p>“It is true that my death is in such an egg,” said the Serpent of the East, “but nobody will ever find that egg, and therefore I am resistless and immortal.”</p>
			<p>“To the contrary, the egg, as you can perceive, is in my hand; and when I break this egg you will die, and it is smaller worms than you that will be thanking me for their supper this night.”</p>
			<p>The serpent looked at the poised egg, and he trembled and writhed so that his black scales scattered everywhither scintillations of reflected sunlight. He cried, “Give me the egg, and I will permit you two to ascend unmolested, to a more terrible destruction.”</p>
			<p>Niafer was not eager to do this, but Manuel thought it best, and so at last Niafer consented to the bargain, for the sake of the serpent’s children. Then the two lads went upward, while the serpent bandaged the eyes of his horse and of his hound, and hooded his falcon, and crept gingerly away to hide the egg in an unmentionable place.</p>
			<p>“But how in the devil,” says Manuel, “did you manage to come by that invaluable egg?”</p>
			<p>“It is a quite ordinary duck egg, Manuel. But the Serpent of the East has no way of discovering the fact unless he breaks the egg: and that is the one thing the serpent will never do, because he thinks it is the magic egg which contains his death.”</p>
			<p>“Come, Niafer, you are not handsome to look at, but you are far cleverer than I thought you!”</p>
			<p>Now, as Manuel clapped Niafer on the shoulder, the forest beside the roadway was agitated, and the underbrush crackled, and the tall beech-trees crashed and snapped and tumbled helter-skelter. The crust of the earth was thus broken through by the Serpent of the North. Only the head and throat of this design of Miramon’s was lifted from the jumbled trees, for it was requisite of course that the serpent’s lower coils should never loose their grip upon the foundations of Norroway. All of the design that showed was overgrown with seaweed and barnacles.</p>
			<p>“It is the will of Miramon Lluagor that I forthwith demolish you both,” says this serpent, yawning with a mouth like a fanged cave.</p>
			<p>Once more young Manuel had reached for his charmed sword Flamberge, but it was Niafer who spoke.</p>
			<p>“No, for before you can destroy me,” says Niafer, “I shall have cast this bridle over your head.”</p>
			<p>“What sort of bridle is that?” inquired the great snake scornfully.</p>
			<p>“And are those goggling flaming eyes not big enough and bright enough to see that this is the soft bridle called Gleipnir, which is made of the breath of fish and of the spittle of birds and of the footfall of a cat?”</p>
			<p>“Now, although certainly such a bridle was foretold,” the snake conceded, a little uneasily, “how can I make sure that you speak the truth when you say this particular bridle is Gleipnir?”</p>
			<p>“Why, in this way: I will cast the bridle over your head, and then you will see for yourself that the old prophecy will be fulfilled, and that all power and all life will go out of you, and that the Northmen will dream no more.”</p>
			<p>“No, do you keep that thing away from me, you little fool! No, no: we will not test your truthfulness in that way. Instead, do you two continue your ascent, to a more terrible destruction, and to face barbaric dooms coming from the West. And do you give me the bridle to demolish in place of you. And then, if I live forever I shall know that this is indeed Gleipnir, and that you have spoken the truth.”</p>
			<p>So Niafer consented to this testing of his veracity, rather than permit this snake to die, and the foundations of Norroway (in which kingdom, Niafer confessed, he had an aunt then living) thus to be dissolved by the loosening of the dying serpent’s grip upon Middlegarth. The bridle was yielded, and Niafer and Manuel went upward.</p>
			<p>Manuel asked, “Snip, was that in truth the bridle called Gleipnir?”</p>
			<p>“No, Manuel, it is an ordinary bridle. But this Serpent of the North has no way of discovering this fact except by fitting the bridle over his head: and this one thing the serpent will never do, because he knows that then, if my bridle proved to be Gleipnir, all power and all life would go out of him.”</p>
			<p>“O subtle, ugly little snip!” says Manuel: and again he patted Niafer on the shoulder. Then Manuel spoke very highly in praise of cleverness, and said that, for one, he had never objected to it in its place.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
