<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>VIII</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>The Halo of Holiness</i>
			</h4>
			<p>Now Manuel takes ship across the fretful Bay of Biscay, traveling always toward Provence and Alianora, whom people called the Unattainable Princess. Oriander the Swimmer followed this ship, they say, but he attempted to do Manuel no hurt, at least not for that turn.</p>
			<p>So Manuel of the high head comes into the country of wicked King Ferdinand; and, toward All-Hallows, they bring a stupendous florid young man to the King in the torture-chamber. King Ferdinand was not idle at the moment, and he looked up good-temperedly enough from his employment: but almost instantly his merry face was overcast.</p>
			<p>“Dear me!” says Ferdinand, as he dropped his white hot pincers sizzlingly into a jar of water, “and I had hoped you would not be bothering me for a good ten years!”</p>
			<p>“Now if I bother you at all it is against my will,” declared Manuel, very politely, “nor do I willingly intrude upon you here, for, without criticizing anybody’s domestic arrangements, there are one or two things that I do not fancy the looks of in this torture-chamber.”</p>
			<p>“That is as it may be. In the mean time, what is that I see in your pocket wrapped in red silk?”</p>
			<p>“It is a feather, King, wrapped in a bit of my sister’s best petticoat.”</p>
			<p>Then Ferdinand sighed, and he arose from his interesting experiments with what was left of the Marquess de Henestrosa, to whom the King had taken a sudden dislike that morning.</p>
			<p>“Tut, tut!” said Ferdinand: “yet, after all, I have had a brave time of it, with my enormities and my iniquities, and it is not as though there were nothing to look back on! So at what price will you sell me that feather?”</p>
			<p>“But surely a feather is no use to anybody, King, for does it not seem to you a quite ordinary feather?”</p>
			<p>“Come!” says King Ferdinand, as he washed his hands, “do people anywhere wrap ordinary feathers in red silk? You squinting rascal, do not think to swindle me out of eternal bliss by any such foolish talk! I perfectly recognize that feather as the feather which Milcah plucked from the left pinion of the Archangel Oriphiel when the sons of God were on more intricate and scandalous terms with the daughters of men than are permitted nowadays.”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir,” replied Manuel, “you may be right in a world wherein nothing is certain. At all events, I have deduced, from one to two things in this torture-chamber, that it is better not to argue with King Ferdinand.”</p>
			<p>“How can I help being right, when it was foretold long ago that such a divine emissary as you would bring this very holy relic to turn me from my sins and make a saint of me?” says Ferdinand, peevishly.</p>
			<p>“It appears to me a quite ordinary feather, King: but I recall what a madman told me, and I do not dispute that your prophets are wiser than I, for I have been a divine emissary for only a short while.”</p>
			<p>“Do you name your price for this feather, then!”</p>
			<p>“I think it would be more respectful, sir, to refer you to the prophets, for I find them generous and big-hearted creatures.”</p>
			<p>Ferdinand nodded his approval. “That is very piously spoken, because it was prophesied that this relic would be given me for no price at all by a great nobleman. So I must forthwith write out for you a count’s commission, I suppose, and must write out your grants to fertile lands and a stout castle or two, and must date your title to these things from yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” said Manuel, “it would not look well for you to be neglecting due respect to such a famous prophecy, with that bottle of ink at your elbow.”</p>
			<p>So King Ferdinand sent for the Count of Poictesme, and explained to him as between old friends how the matter stood, and that afternoon the high Count was confessed and decapitated. Poictesme being now a vacant fief, King Ferdinand ennobled Manuel, and made him Count of Poictesme.</p>
			<p>It was true that all Poictesme was then held by the Northmen, under Duke Asmund, who denied King Ferdinand’s authority with contempt, and defeated him in battle with annoying persistence: so that Manuel for the present acquired nothing but the sonorous title.</p>
			<p>“Some terrible calamity, however,” as King Ferdinand pointed out, “is sure to befall Asmund and his iniquitous followers before very long, so we need not bother about them.”</p>
			<p>“But how may I be certain of that, sir?” Manuel asked.</p>
			<p>“Count, I am surprised at such scepticism! Is it not very explicitly stated in Holy Writ that though the wicked may flourish for a while they are presently felled like green bay-trees?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, to be sure! So there is no doubt that your soldiers will soon conquer Duke Asmund.”</p>
			<p>“But I must not send any soldiers to fight against him, now that I am a saint, for that would not look well. It would have an irreligious appearance of prompting Heaven.”</p>
			<p>“Still, King, you are sending soldiers against the Moors⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but it is not your lands, Count, but my city of Ubeda, which the Moors are attacking, and to attack a saint, as you must undoubtedly understand, is a dangerous heresy which it is my duty to put down.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, to be sure! Well, well!” says Manuel, “at any rate, to be a count is something, and it is better to ward a fine name than a parcel of pigs, though it appears the pigs are the more nourishing.”</p>
			<p>In the mean while the King’s heralds rode everywhither in fluted armor, to proclaim the fulfilment of the old prophecy as to the Archangel Oriphiel’s feather. Never before was there such a hubbub in those parts, for the bells of all the churches sounded all day, and all the people ran about praying at the top of their voices, and forgiving their relatives, and kissing the girls, and blowing whistles and ringing cowbells, because the city now harbored a relic so holy that the vilest sinner had but to touch it to be purified of iniquity.</p>
			<p>And that day King Ferdinand dismissed the evil companions with whom he had so long rioted in every manner of wickedness, and Ferdinand lived henceforward as became a saint. He builded two churches a year, and fared edifyingly on roots and herbs; he washed the feet of three indigent persons daily, and went in sackcloth; whenever he burned heretics he fetched and piled up the wood himself, so as to inconvenience nobody; and he made prioresses and abbesses of his more intimate and personal associates of yesterday, because he knew that people are made holy by contact with holiness, and that sainthood is retroactive.</p>
			<p>Thereafter Count Manuel abode for a month at the court of King Ferdinand, noting whatever to this side and to that side seemed most notable. Manuel was generally liked by the elect, and in the evening when the court assembled for family-prayers nobody was more devout than the Count of Poictesme. He had a quiet way with the abbesses and prioresses, and with the anchorites and bishops a way of simplicity which was vastly admired in a divine emissary. “But the particular favor of Heaven,” as King Ferdinand pointed out, “is always reserved for modest persons.”</p>
			<p>The feather from the wing of Helmas’ goose King Ferdinand had caused to be affixed to the unassuming skullcap with a halo of gold wire which Ferdinand now wore in the place of a vainglorious earthly crown; so that perpetual contiguity with this relic might keep him in augmenting sanctity. And now that doubt of himself had gone out of his mind, Ferdinand lived untroubled, and his digestion improved on his light diet of roots and herbs, and his loving-kindness was infinite, because he could not now be angry with the pitiable creatures haled before him, when he considered what lengthy and ingenious torments awaited every one of them, either in hell or purgatory, while Ferdinand would be playing a gold harp in heaven.</p>
			<p>So Ferdinand dealt tenderly and generously with all. Half of his subjects said that simply showed you: and the rest of them assented that indeed you might well say that, and they had often thought of it, and had wished that young people would take profit by considering such things more seriously.</p>
			<p>And Manuel got clay and modeled a figure which had the features and the holy look of King Ferdinand.</p>
			<p>“Yes, this young fellow you have made of mud is something like me,” the King conceded, “although clay of course cannot do justice to the fine red cheeks and nose I used to have in the unregenerate days when I thought about such vanities, and, besides, it is rather more like you. Still, Count, the thing has feeling, it is wholesome, it is refreshingly free from these modern morbid considerations of anatomy, and it does you credit.”</p>
			<p>“No, King, I like this figure well enough, now that it is done, but it is not, I somehow know, the figure I desire to make. No, I must follow after my own thinking and my own desires, and I do not need holiness.”</p>
			<p>“You artists!” the King said. “But there is more than mud upon your mind.”</p>
			<p>“In fact, I am puzzled, King, to see you made a saint of by its being expected of you.”</p>
			<p>“But, Count, that ought to grieve nobody, so long as I do not complain, and it is of something graver you are thinking.”</p>
			<p>“I think, sir, that it is not right to rob anybody of anything, and I reflect that absolute righteousness is a fine feather in one’s cap.”</p>
			<p>Then Manuel went into the chicken-yard behind the red-roofed palace of King Ferdinand, and caught a goose, and plucked from its wing a feather. Thereafter the florid young Count of Poictesme rode east, on a tall dappled horse, and a retinue of six lackeys in silver and black liveries came cantering after him, and the two foremost lackeys carried in knapsacks, marked with a gold coronet, the images which Dom Manuel had made. A third lackey carried Dom Manuel’s shield, upon which were emblazoned the arms of Poictesme. The black shield displayed a silver stallion which was rampant in every member and was bridled with gold, but the ancient arms had been given a new motto.</p>
			<p>“What means this Greek?” Dom Manuel had asked.</p>
			<p>“<i>Mundus decipit</i>, Count,” they told him, “is the old pious motto of Poictesme: it signifies that the affairs of this world are a vain fleeting show, and that terrestrial appearances are nowhere of any particular importance.”</p>
			<p>“Then your motto is green inexperience,” said Manuel, “and for me to bear it would be black ingratitude.”</p>
			<p>So the writing had been changed in accordance with his instructions, and it now read <i>Mundus vult decipi</i>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
