<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XIX</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>The Head of Misery</i>
			</h4>
			<p>When Manuel had reached the outskirts of the forest he encountered there a knight in vermilion armor, with a woman’s sleeve wreathed about his helmet: and, first of all, this knight demanded who was Manuel’s lady love.</p>
			<p>“I have no living love,” said Manuel, “except the woman whom I am leaving without ceremony, because it seems the only way to avoiding argument.”</p>
			<p>“But that is unchivalrous, and does not look well.”</p>
			<p>“Very probably you are right, but I am not chivalrous. I am Manuel. I follow after my own thinking, and an obligation is upon me pointing toward prompt employment of the knowledge I have gained from this woman.”</p>
			<p>“You are a rascally betrayer of women, then, and an unmanly scoundrel.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose so, for I betrayed another woman, in that I permitted and indeed assisted her to die in my stead; and so brought yet another bond upon myself, and an obligation which is drawing me from a homelike place and from soft arms wherein I was content enough,” says Manuel, sighing.</p>
			<p>But the chivalrous adventurer in red armor was disgusted. “Oh, you tall squinting villain knight of the silver stallion, I wonder from whose court you can be coming, where they teach no better behavior than woman-killing, and I wonder what foul new knavery you can be planning here.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I was last in residence at Raymond Bérenger’s court,” says Manuel: “and since you are bent on knowing about my private affairs, I come to this forest in search of Béda, or Kruchina, or whatever you call the Misery of earth in these parts.”</p>
			<p>“Aha, and are you one of Raymond Bérenger’s friends?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose so,” says Manuel, blinking⁠—“yes, I suppose so, since I have prevented his being poisoned.”</p>
			<p>“This is good hearing, for I have always been one of Raymond Bérenger’s enemies, and all such of his friends as I have encountered I have slain.”</p>
			<p>“Doubtless you have your reasons,” said Manuel, and would have ridden by.</p>
			<p>But the other cried furiously, “Turn, you tall fool! Turn, cowardly betrayer of women!”</p>
			<p>He came upon Manuel like a whirlwind, and Manuel had no choice in the matter. So they fought, and presently Manuel brought the vermilion knight to the ground, and, dismounting, killed him. It was noticeable that from the death-wound came no blood, but only a flowing of very fine black sand, out of which scrambled and hastily scampered away a small vermilion-colored mouse.</p>
			<p>Then Manuel said, “I think that this must be the peculiarly irrational part of the forest, to which I was directed, and I wonder what may have been this scarlet squabbler’s grievance against King Raymond Bérenger?”</p>
			<p>Nobody answered, so Manuel remounted, and rode on.</p>
			<p>Count Manuel skirted the Wolflake, and came to a hut, painted gray, that stood clear of the ground, upon the bones of four great birds’ feet. Upon the four corners of the hunt were carved severally the figures of a lion, a dragon, a cockatrice and an adder, to proclaim the miseries of carnal and intellectual sin, and of pride, and of death.</p>
			<p>Here Manuel tethered his horse to a holm-oak. He raised both arms, facing the East.</p>
			<p>“Do you now speed me!” cried Manuel, “ye thirty Barami! O all ye powers of accumulated merit, O most high masters of Almsgiving, of Morality, of Relinquishment, of Wisdom, of Fortitude, of Patience, of Truth, of Determination, of Charity, and of Equanimity! do all you aid me in my encounter with the Misery of earth!”</p>
			<p>He piously crossed himself, and went into the hut. Inside, the walls were adorned with very old-looking frescoes that were equally innocent of perspective and reticence: the floor was of tessellated bronze. In each corner Manuel found, set upright, a many-storied umbrella of the kind used for sacred purposes in the East: each of these had a silver handle, and was worked in nine colors. But most important of all, so Manuel had been told, was the pumpkin which stood opposite to the doorway.</p>
			<p>Manuel kindled a fire, and prepared the proper kind of soup: and at sunset he went to the window of the hut, and cried out three times that supper was ready.</p>
			<p>One answered him, “I am coming.”</p>
			<p>Manuel waited. There was now no sound in the forest: even the few birds not yet gone south, that had been chirping of the day’s adventures, were hushed on a sudden, and the breeze died in the tree-tops. Inside the hut Manuel lighted his four candles, and he disposed of one under each umbrella in the prescribed manner. His footsteps on the bronze flooring, and the rustling of his garments as he went about the hut doing what was requisite, were surprisingly sharp and distinct noises in a vast silence and in an illimitable loneliness.</p>
			<p>Then said a thin little voice, “Manuel, open the door!”</p>
			<p>Manuel obeyed, and you could see nobody anywhere in the forest’s dusk. The twilit brown and yellow trees were still as paintings. His horse stood tethered and quite motionless, except that it was shivering.</p>
			<p>One spoke at his feet. “Manuel, lift me over the threshold!”</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel, recoiling, looked downward, and in the patch of candlelight between the shadows of his legs you could see a human head. He raised the head, and carried it into the hut. He could now perceive that the head was made of white clay, and could deduce that the Misery of earth, whom some call Béda, and others Kruchina, had come to him.</p>
			<p>“Now, Manuel,” says Misery, “do you give me my supper.”</p>
			<p>So Manuel set the head upon the table, and put a platter of soup before the head, and fed the soup to Misery with a gold spoon.</p>
			<p>When the head had supped, it bade Manuel place it in the little bamboo cradle, and told Manuel to put out the lights. Many persons would not have fancied being alone in the dark with Misery, but Manuel obeyed. He knelt to begin his nightly prayer, but at once that happened which induced him to desist. So without his usual divine invocation, Dom Manuel lay down upon the bronze floor of the hut, beneath one of the tall umbrellas, and he rolled up his russet cloak for a pillow. Presently the head was snoring, and then Manuel too went to sleep. He said, later, that he dreamed of Niafer.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
