<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXX: Farewell to Freydis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Farewell to Freydis</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>They went upstairs together, into the room with scarlet hangings, and to the golden bed where, with seven sorts of fruit properly arranged at the bedside, Dom Manuel’s wife Niafer lay asleep. Manuel drew his dagger. Niafer turned in her sleep, so that she seemed to offer her round small throat to the raised knife. You saw now that on the other side of the golden bed sat Queen Freydis, making a rich glow of color there, and in her lap was the newborn naked child.</p>
			<p>Freydis rose, holding the child to her breast, and smiling. A devil might smile thus upon contriving some new torment for lost souls, but a fair woman’s face should not be so cruel. Then this evil joy passed from the face of Freydis. She dipped her fingers into the bowl of water with which she had been bathing the child, and with her fingertips she made upon the child’s forehead the sign of a cross.</p>
			<p>Said Freydis, “Melicent, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”</p>
			<p>Sesphra passed wildly toward the fireplace, crying, “A penny, a penny, twopence, a penny and a half, and a halfpenny!” At his call the fire shot forth tall flames, and Sesphra entered these flames as a man goes between parted curtains, and instantly the fire collapsed and was as it had been. Already the hands of Freydis were moving deftly in the Sleep Charm, so that Niafer did not move. Freydis today was resplendently robed in flame-colored silk, and about her dark hair was a circlet of burnished copper.</p>
			<p>Manuel had dropped his dagger so that the point of it pierced the floor, and the weapon stood erect and quivering. But Manuel was shaken for a moment more horribly than shook the dagger: you would have said he was convulsed with horror and self-loathing. So for an instant he waited, looking at Dame Niafer, who slept untroubled, and at fiery-colored Freydis, who was smiling rather queerly: and then the old composure came back to Manuel.</p>
			<p>“Breaker of all oaths,” says Freydis, “I must tell you that this Sesphra is pagan, and cannot thrive except among those whose love is given to the unchristened. Thus he might not come to Sargyll until the arrival of this little heathen whom I have just made Christian. Now we have only Christian terrors here; and again your fate is in my hands.”</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel looked grave. “Freydis,” he said, “you have rescued me from very unbecoming conduct. A moment more and I would have slain my wife and child because of this Sesphra’s resistless magic.”</p>
			<p>Says Freydis, still smiling a queer secret smile: “Indeed, there is no telling into what folly and misery Sesphra would not have led you. For you fashioned his legs unevenly, and he has not ever pardoned you his lameness.”</p>
			<p>“The thing is a devil,” Manuel said. “And this is the figure I desired to make, this is the child of my long dreams and labors! This is the creature I designed to be more admirable and significant than the drab men I found in streets and lanes and palaces! Certainly, I have loosed among mankind a blighting misery which I cannot control at all.”</p>
			<p>“The thing is you as you were once, gray Manuel. You had comeliness and wit and youth and courage, and these you gave the image, shaping it boldly to your proud youth’s will and in your proud youth’s likeness. But human pity and any constant love you did not then have to give, either to your fellows or to the fine figure you made, nor, very certainly, to me. So you amused yourself by making Sesphra and by making me that which we are today.”</p>
			<p>Now again showed subtly evil thoughts in the face of this shrewd flaming woman who had so recently brought about the destruction of King Thibaut, and of the Duke of Istria, and of those other enamored lords. And Dom Manuel began to regard her more intently.</p>
			<p>In Manuel’s sandals the average person would have reflected, long before this, that Manuel and his wife and child were in this sorcerous place at the mercy of the whims and the unwholesome servitors of this not very dependable looking witch-woman. The average person would have recollected distastefully that unusual panther and that discomfortable night-porter and the madness which had smitten Duke Asmund’s men, and the clattering vicious little hoofs of the shrill dwarfs; and to the average person this room would have seemed a desirable place to be many leagues away from.</p>
			<p>But candid blunt Dom Manuel said, with jovial laughter: “You speak as if you had not grown more adorable every day, dear Freydis, and as though I would not be vastly flattered to think I had any part in the improvement. You should not fish thus unblushingly for compliments.”</p>
			<p>The sombre glitterings that were her eyes had narrowed, and she was looking at his hands. Then Freydis said: “There are pinpoints of sweat upon the back of your hands, gray Manuel, and so alone do I know that you are badly frightened. Yes, you are rather wonderful, even now.”</p>
			<p>“I am not unduly frightened, but I am naturally upset by what has just happened. Anybody would be. For I do not know what I must anticipate in the future, and I wish that I had never meddled in this mischancy business of creating things I cannot manage.”</p>
			<p>Queen Freydis moved in shimmering splendor toward the fireplace. She paused there, considerately looking down at the small contention of flames. “Did you not, though, again create much misery when for your pleasure you gave life to this girl child? Certainly you must know that there will be in her life⁠—if life indeed be long spared to her,” said Freydis, reflectively⁠—“far less of joy than of sorrow, for that is the way it is with the life of everybody. But all this likewise is out of your hands. In Sesphra and in the child and in me you have lightly created that which you cannot control. No, it is I who control the outcome.”</p>
			<p>Now a golden panther came quite noiselessly into the room, and sat to the right of Freydis, and looked at Dom Manuel.</p>
			<p>“Why, to be sure,” says Manuel, heartily, “and I am sure, too, that nobody is better qualified to handle it. Come now, Freydis, just as you say, this is a serious situation, and something really ought to be done about this situation. Come now, dear friend, in what way can we take back the life we gave this lovely fiend?”</p>
			<p>“And would I be wanting to kill my husband?” Queen Freydis asked, and she smiled wonderfully. “Why, but yes, this fair lame child of yours is my husband today⁠—poor, frightened, fidgeting gray Manuel⁠—and I love him, for Sesphra is all that you were when I loved you, Manuel, and when you condescended to take your pleasure of me.”</p>
			<p>Now an orange-colored rat came into the room, and sat down upon the hearth to the left hand of Freydis, and looked at Dom Manuel. And the rat was is large as the panther.</p>
			<p>Then Freydis said: “No, Manuel, Sesphra must live for a great while, long after you have been turned to graveyard dust: and he will limp about wherever pagans are to be found, and he will always win much love from the high-hearted pagans because of his comeliness and because of his unfading jaunty youth. And whether he will do any good anywhere is doubtful, but it is certain he will do harm, and it is equally certain that already he weighs my happiness as carelessly as you once weighed it.”</p>
			<p>Now came into the room another creature, such as no madman has ever seen or imagined, and it lay down at the feet of Freydis, and it looked at Dom Manuel. Couched thus, this creature yawned and disclosed unreassuring teeth.</p>
			<p>“Well, Freydis,” says Dom Manuel, handsomely, “but, to be sure, what you tell me puts a new complexion upon matters, and not for worlds would I be coming between husband and wife⁠—”</p>
			<p>Queen Freydis looked up from the flames, toward Dom Manuel, very sadly. Freydis shrugged, flinging out her hands above the heads of the accursed beasts. “And at the last I cannot do that, either. So do you two dreary, unimportant, well-mated people remain undestroyed, now that I go to seek my husband, and now I endeavor to win my pardon for not letting him torment you. Eh, I was tempted, gray Manuel, to let my masterful fine husband have his pleasure of you, and of this lean ugly hobbling creature and her brat, too, as formerly you had your pleasure of me. But women are so queerly fashioned that at the last I cannot, quite, consent to harm this gray, staid, tedious fellow, nor any of his chattels. For all passes in this world save one thing only: and though the young Manuel whom I loved in a summer that is gone, be nowadays as perished as that summer’s gay leaves, it is certain a woman’s folly does not ever perish.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, I did not merit that you should care for me,” says Manuel, rather unhappily. “But I have always been, and always shall be sincerely fond of you, Freydis, and for that reason I rejoice to deduce that you are not, now, going to do anything violent and irreparable and such as your better nature would afterward regret.”</p>
			<p>“I loved you once,” she said, “and now I am assured the core of you was always a cold and hard and colorless and very common pebble. But it does not matter now that I am a mortal woman. Either way, you have again made use of me. I have afforded you shelter when you were homeless. And now again you will be getting your desire.”</p>
			<p>Queen Freydis went to the window, and lifted the scarlet curtain figured with ramping gold dragons; but the couching beasts stayed by the hearth, and they continued to look at Dom Manuel.</p>
			<p>“Yes, now again, gray Manuel, you will be getting your desire. That ship which shows at the river bend, with serpents and castles painted on its brown sails, is Miramon Lluagor’s ship, which he has sent to fetch you from Sargyll: and the last day of your days of exile is now over. For Miramon is constrained by one who is above us all; therefore Miramon comes gladly and very potently to assist you. And I⁠—who have served your turn!⁠—I may now depart, to look for Sesphra, and for my pardon if I can get it.”</p>
			<p>“But whither do you go, dear Freydis?” Dom Manuel spoke as though he again felt quite fond of her.</p>
			<p>“What does that matter,” she answered, looking long and long at him, “now that Count Manuel has no further need of me?” Then Freydis looked at Niafer, lying there in a charmed sleep. “I neither love nor entirely hate you, ugly and lame and lean and fretful Niafer, but assuredly I do not envy you. You are welcome to your fidgeting gray husband. My husband is a ruthless god. My husband does not grow old and tenderhearted and subservient to me, and he never will.” Thereafter Freydis bent downward, and Freydis kissed the child she had christened. “Some day you will be a woman, Melicent, and then you will be loving some man or another man. I could hope that you will then love the man who will make you happy, but that sort of man has not yet been found.”</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel came to her, not heeding the accursed beasts at all, and he took both the hands of Freydis in his hands. “My dear, and do you think I am a happy man?”</p>
			<p>She looked up at him: when she answered, her voice trembled. “I made you happy, Manuel. I would have made you happy always.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder if you would have? Ah, well, at all events, the obligation was upon me. At no time in a man’s life, I find, is there lacking some obligation or another: and we must meet each as we best can, not hoping to succeed, just aiming not to fall short too far. No, it is not a merry pursuit. And it is a ruining pursuit!”</p>
			<p>She said, “I had not thought ever to be sorry for you⁠—Why should I grieve for you, gray traitor?”</p>
			<p>Harshly he answered: “Oho, I am not proud of what I have made of my life, and of your life, and of the life of that woman yonder, but do you think I will be whining about it! No, Freydis: the boy that loved and deserted you is here,”⁠—he beat upon his breast⁠—“locked in, imprisoned while time lasts, dying very lonelily. Well, I am a shrewd gaoler: he shall not get out. No, even at the last, dear Freydis, there is the bond of silence.”</p>
			<p>She said, impotently, “I am sorry⁠—Even at the last you contrive for me a new sorrow⁠—”</p>
			<p>For a moment they stood looking at each other, and she remembered thereafter his sad and quizzical smiling. These two had nothing more to share in speech or deed.</p>
			<p>Then Freydis went away, and the accursed beasts and her castle too went with her, as smoke passes. Manuel was thus left standing out of doors in a reaped field, alone with his wife and child while Miramon’s ship came about. Niafer slept. But now the child awoke to regard the world into which she had been summoned willy-nilly, and the child began to whimper.</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel patted this intimidating small creature gingerly, with a strong comely hand from which his wedding ring was missing. That would require explanations.</p>
			<p>It therefore seems not improbable that he gave over this brief period of waiting, in a reaped field, to wondering just how much about the past he might judiciously tell his wife when she awoke to question him, because in the old days that was a problem which no considerate husband failed to weigh with care.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
