<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Opinions of Hinzelmann</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Now the tale tells that on Michaelmas morning little Melicent, being in a quiet mood that time, sat with her doll in the tall chair by the third window of Ageus while her father wrote at his big table. He was pausing between phrases to think and to bite at his thumbnail, and he was so intent upon this letter to Pope Innocent that he did not notice the slow opening of the third window: and Melicent had been in conference with the queer small boy for some while before Dom Manuel looked up abstractedly toward them. Then Manuel seemed perturbed, and he called Melicent to him, and she obediently scrambled into her father’s lap.</p>
			<p>There was silence in the Room of Ageus. The queer small boy sat leaning back in the chair which little Melicent had just left. He sat with his legs crossed, and with his gloved hands clasping his right knee, as he looked appraisingly at Melicent. He displayed a beautiful sad face, with curled yellow hair hanging about his shoulders, and he was dressed in a vermilion silk coat: at his left side, worn like a sword, was a vast pair of shears. He wore also a pointed hat of four interblended colors, and his leather gloves were figured with pearls.</p>
			<p>“She will be a woman by and by,” the strange boy said, with a soft and delicate voice, “and then she too will be coming to us, and we will provide fine sorrows for her.”</p>
			<p>“No, Hinzelmann,” Count Manuel replied, as he stroked the round straw-colored head of little Melicent. “This is the child of Niafer. She comes of a race that has no time to be peering out of dubious windows.”</p>
			<p>“It is your child too, Count Manuel. Therefore she too, between now and her burial, will be wanting to be made free of my sister Suskind’s kingdom, as you have been made free of it, at a price. Oh, very certainly you have paid little as yet save the one lock of your gray hair, but in time you will pay the other price which Suskind demands. I know, for it is I who collect my sister Suskind’s revenues, and when the proper hour arrives, believe me, Count Manuel, I shall not be asking your leave, nor is there any price which you, I think, will not be paying willingly.”</p>
			<p>“That is probable. For Suskind is wise and strange, and the grave beauty of her youth is the fulfilment of an old hope. Life had become a tedious matter of much money and much bloodshed, but she has restored to me the gold and crimson of dawn.”</p>
			<p>“So, do you very greatly love my sister Suskind?” says Hinzelmann, smiling rather sadly.</p>
			<p>“She is my heart’s delight, and the desire of my desire. It was she for whom, unwittingly, I had been longing always, since I first went away from Suskind, to climb upon the gray heights of Vraidex in my long pursuit of much wealth and fame. I had seen my wishes fulfilled, and my dreams accomplished; all the godlike discontents which ennobled my youth had died painlessly in cushioned places. And living had come to be a habit of doing what little persons expected, and youth was gone out of me, and I, that used to follow with a high head after my own thinking and my own desires, could not any longer very greatly care for anything. Now I am changed: for Suskind has made me free once more of the Country of the Young and of the ageless self-tormenting youth of the gray depths which maddened Ruric, but did not madden me.”</p>
			<p>“Look you, Count Manuel, but that penniless young nobody, Ruric the clerk, was not trapped as you are trapped. For from the faith of others there is no escape upon this side of the window. World-famous Manuel the Redeemer has in this place his luck and prosperity to maintain until the orderings of unimaginative gods have quite destroyed the Manuel that once followed after his own thinking. For even the high gods here note with approval that you have become the sort of person in whom the gods put confidence, and so they favor you unscrupulously. Here all is prearranged for you by the thinking of others. Here there is no escape for you from acquiring a little more wealth today, a little more meadowland tomorrow, with daily a little more applause and honor and envy from your fellows, along with always slowly increasing wrinkles and dulling wits and an augmenting paunch, and with the smug approval of everybody upon earth and in heaven. That is the reward of those persons whom you humorously call successful persons.”</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel answered very slowly, and to little Melicent it seemed that Father’s voice was sad.</p>
			<p>Said Manuel: “Certainly, I think there is no escape for me upon this side of the window of Ageus. A bond was put upon me to make a figure in this world, and I discharged that obligation. Then came another and yet another obligation to be discharged. And now has come upon me a geas which is not to be lifted either by toils or by miracles. It is the geas which is laid on every person, and the life of every man is as my life, with no moment free from some bond or another. Heh, youth vaunts windily, but in the end nobody can follow after his own thinking and his own desire. At every turn he is confronted by that which is expected, and obligation follows obligation, and in the long run no champion can be stronger than everybody. So we succumb to this world’s terrible unreason, willy-nilly, and Helmas has been made wise, and Ferdinand has been made saintly, and I have been made successful, by that which was expected of us, and by that which none of us had ever any real chance to resist in a world wherein all men are nourished by their beliefs.”</p>
			<p>“And does not success content you?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but,” asked Manuel slowly, just as he had once asked Horvendile in Manuel’s lost youth, “what is success? They tell me I have succeeded marvelously in all things, rising from low beginnings, to become the most lucky and the least scrupulous rogue alive: yet, hearing men’s applause, I sometimes wonder, for I know that a smaller-hearted creature and a creature poorer in spirit is posturing in Count Manuel’s high cushioned places than used to go afield with the miller’s pigs.”</p>
			<p>“Why, yes, Count Manuel, you have made endurable terms with this world by succumbing to its foolishness: but do you take comfort, for that is the one way open to anybody who has not rightly seen and judged the ends of this world. At worst, you have had all your desires, and you have made a very notable figure in Count Manuel’s envied station.”</p>
			<p>“But I starve there, Hinzelmann, I dry away into stone, and this envied living is reshaping me into a complacent idol for fools to honor, and the approval of fools is converting the heart and wits of me into the stony heart and wits of an idol. And I look back upon my breathless old endeavors, and I wonder drearily, ‘Was it for this?’ ”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Hinzelmann said: and he shrugged, without ever putting off that sad smile of his. “Yes, yes, all this is only another way of saying that Béda has kept his word. But no man gets rid of Misery, Count Manuel, except at a price.”</p>
			<p>They stayed silent for a while. Count Manuel stroked the round straw-colored head of little Melicent. Hinzelmann played with the small cross which hung at Hinzelmann’s neck. This cross appeared to be woven of plaited strings, but when Hinzelmann shook the cross it jingled like a bell.</p>
			<p>“Yet, none the less,” says Hinzelmann, “here you remain. No, certainly, I cannot understand you, Count Manuel. As a drunkard goes back to the destroying cask, so do you continue to return to your fine home at Storisende and to the incessant whispering of your father’s father, for all that you have but to remain in Suskind’s low red-pillared palace to be forever rid of that whisper and of this dreary satiating of human desires.”</p>
			<p>“I shall of course make my permanent quarters there by and by,” Count Manuel said, “but not just yet. It would not be quite fair to my wife for me to be leaving Storisende just now, when we are getting in the crops, and when everything is more or less upset already⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I perceive you are still inventing excuses, Count Manuel, to put off yielding entire allegiance to my sister.”</p>
			<p>“No, it is not that, not that at all! It is only the upset condition of things, just now, and, besides, Hinzelmann, the stork is to bring us the last girl child the latter part of next week. We are to call her Ettarre, and I would like to have a sight of her, of course⁠—In fact, I am compelled to stay through mere civility, inasmuch as the Queen of Philistia is sending the very famous <abbr>St.</abbr> Holmendis especially to christen this baby. And it would be, Hinzelmann, the height of rudeness for me to be leaving home, just now, as though I wanted to avoid his visit⁠—”</p>
			<p>Hinzelmann still smiled rather sadly. “Last month you could not come to us because your wife was just then outworn with standing in the hot kitchen and stewing jams and marmalades. Dom Manuel, will you come when the baby is delivered and this Saint has been attended to and all the crops are in?”</p>
			<p>“Well, but Hinzelmann, within a week or two we shall be brewing this year’s ale, and I have always more or less seen to that⁠—”</p>
			<p>Still Hinzelmann smiled sadly. He pointed with his small gloved hand toward Melicent. “And what about your other enslavement, to this child here?”</p>
			<p>“Why, certainly, Hinzelmann, the brat does need a father to look out for her, so long as she is the merest baby. And naturally, I have been thinking about that of late, rather seriously⁠—”</p>
			<p>Hinzelmann spoke with deliberation. “She is very nearly the most stupid and the most unattractive child I have ever seen. And I, you must remember, am blood brother to Cain and Seth as well as to Suskind.”</p>
			<p>But Dom Manuel was not provoked. “As if I did not know the child is in no way remarkable! No, my good Hinzelmann, you that serve Suskind have shown me strange dear things, but nothing more strange and dear than a thing which I discovered for myself. For I am that Manuel whom men call the Redeemer of Poictesme, and my deeds will be the themes of harpers whose grandparents are not yet born; I have known love and war and all manner of adventure: but all the sighings and hushed laughter of yesterday, and all the trumpet-blowing and shouting, and all that I have witnessed of the unreticent fond human ways of great persons who for the while have put aside their state, and all the good that in my day I may have done, and all the evil that I have certainly destroyed⁠—all this seems trivial as set against the producing of this tousled brat. No, to be sure, she is backward as compared with Emmerick, or even Dorothy, and she is not, as you say, an at all remarkable child, though very often, I can assure you, she does things that would astonish you. Now, for instance⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Spare me!” said Hinzelmann.</p>
			<p>“Well, but it really was very clever of her,” Dom Manuel stipulated, with disappointment. “However, I was going to say that I, who have harried pagandom, and capped jests with kings, and am now setting terms for the Holy Father, have come to regard the doings of this ill-bred, selfish, ugly, little imp as more important than my doings. And I cannot resolve to leave her, just yet. So, Hinzelmann, my friend, I think I will not thoroughly commit myself, just yet. But after Christmas we will see about it.”</p>
			<p>“And I will tell you the two reasons of this shilly-shallying, Count Manuel. One reason is that you are human, and the other reason is that in your head there are gray hairs.”</p>
			<p>“What, can it be,” said the big warrior, forlornly, “that I who have not yet had twenty-six years of living am past my prime, and that already life is going out of me?”</p>
			<p>“You must remember the price you paid to win back Dame Niafer from paradise. As truth, and not the almanac, must estimate these things you are now nearer fifty-six.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” Manuel said, stoutly, “I do not regret it, and for Niafer’s sake I am willing to become a hundred and six. But certainly it is hard to think of myself as an old fellow on the brink of the scrap-pile.”</p>
			<p>“Oho, you are not yet so old, Count Manuel, but that Suskind’s power is greater than the power of the child: and besides, there is a way to break the power of the child. Death has merely scratched small wrinkles, very lightly, with one talon, to mark you as his by and by. That is all as yet: and so the power of my high sister Suskind endures over you, who were once used to follow after your own thinking and your own desire, for there remains in you a leaven even today. Yes, yes, though you deny her today, you will be entreating her tomorrow, and then it may be she will punish you. Either way, I must be going now, since you are obstinate, for it is at this time I run about the September world collecting my sister’s revenues, and her debtors are very numerous.”</p>
			<p>And with that the boy, still smiling gravely, slipped out of the third window into the gray sweet-smelling dusk, and little Melicent said, “But, Father, why did that queer sad boy want me to be climbing out of the window with him?”</p>
			<p>“So that he might be kind to you, my dear, as he estimates kindness.”</p>
			<p>“But why did the sad boy want a piece of my hair?” asked Melicent; “and why did he cut it off with his big shiny shears, while you were writing, and he was playing with me?”</p>
			<p>“It was to pay a price,” says Manuel.</p>
			<p>He knew now that the Alf charm was laid on his loved child, and that this was the price of his junketings. He knew also that Suskind would never remit this price.</p>
			<p>Then Melicent demanded, “And what makes your face so white?”</p>
			<p>“It must be pale with hunger, child: so I think that you and I had better be getting to our dinner.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
