<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Month of Years</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the morning, after doing the head’s extraordinary bidding, Manuel went to feed his horse, and found tethered to the holm-oak the steed’s skeleton picked clean. “I grieve at this,” said Manuel, “but I consider it wiser to make no complaint.” Indeed, there was nobody to complain to, for Misery, after having been again lifted over the threshold, had departed to put in a day’s labor with the plague in the north.</p>
			<p>Thereafter Manuel abode in this peculiarly irrational part of the forest, serving Misery for, as men in cheerier places were estimating the time, a month and a day. Of these services it is better not to speak. But the head was pleased by Manuel’s services, because Misery loves company: and the two used to have long friendly talks together when Manuel’s services and Misery’s work for that day were over.</p>
			<p>“And how came you, sir, to be thus housed in a trunkless head?” asked Manuel, one time.</p>
			<p>“Why, when Jahveh created man on the morning of the sixth day, he set about fashioning me that afternoon from the clay which was left over. But he was interrupted by the coming of the Sabbath, for Jahveh was in those days, of course, a very orthodox Jew. So I was left incomplete, and must remain so always.”</p>
			<p>“I deduce that you, then, sir, are Heaven’s last crowning work, and the final finishing touch to creation.”</p>
			<p>“So the pessimists tell me,” the clay head assented, with a yawn. “But I have had a hard day of it, what with the pestilence in Glathion, and wars between the Emperor and the Milanese, and all those October colds, so we will talk no more philosophy.”</p>
			<p>Thus Manuel served the head of Misery, for a month of days and a day. It was a noticeable peculiarity of this part of the forest⁠—a peculiarity well known to everybody, though not quite unanimously explained by the learned⁠—that each day which one spent therein passed as a year, so that Dom Manuel in appearance now aged rapidly. This was unfortunate, especially when his teeth began to fail him, because there were no dentists handy, but his interest in the other Plagues which visited this forest left Manuel little time wherein to think about private worries. For Béda was visited by many of his kindred, such as Mitlan and Kali and Thragnar and Pwyll and Apepi and other evil principles, who were perpetually coming to the gray hut for family reunions, and to rehearse all but one of the two hundred and forty thousand spells of the Capuas. And it was at this time that Manuel got his first glimpse of Sclaug, with whom he had such famous troubles later.</p>
			<p>So sped the month of days that passed as years. Little is known as to what happened in the gray hut, but that perhaps is a good thing. Dom Manuel never talked about it. This much is known, that all day the clay head would be roving about the world, carrying envious reports, and devouring kingdoms, and stirring up patriotism and reform, and whispering malefic counsel, and bringing hurt and sorrow and despair and evil of every kind to men; and that in the evening, when at sunset Phobetor took over this lamentable work, Béda would return contentedly to Dun Vlechlan, for Manuel’s services and a well-earned night’s rest. On most evenings there was unspeakable company, but none of these stayed overnight. And after each night passed alone with Misery, the morning would find Manuel older looking.</p>
			<p>“I wonder, sir, at your callousness, and at the cheery way in which you go about your dreadful business,” said Manuel, once, after he had just cleansed the dripping jaws.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but since I am all head and no heart, therefore I cannot well pity the human beings whom I pursue as a matter of allotted duty.”</p>
			<p>“That seems plausible,” says Manuel, “and I perceive that if appearances are to be trusted you are not personally to blame. Still, I cannot but wonder why the world of men should thus be given over to Misery if Koshchei the Deathless, who made all things as they are, has any care for men.”</p>
			<p>“As to what goes on overhead, Manuel, you must inquire of others. There are persons in charge, I know, but they have never yet permitted Misery to enter into their high places, for I am not popular with them, and that is the truth.”</p>
			<p>“I can understand that, but nevertheless I wonder why Misery should have been created to feed upon mankind.”</p>
			<p>“Probably the cows and sheep and chickens in your barnyards, and the partridges and rabbits in your snares, and even the gasping fish upon your hook, find time to wonder in the same way about you, Dom Manuel.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but man is the higher form of life⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Granting that remarkable assumption, and is any man above Misery? So you see it is logical I should feed on you.”</p>
			<p>“Still, I believe that the Misery of earth was devised as a trial and a testing to fit us for some nobler and eternal life hereafter.”</p>
			<p>“Why in this world should you think that?” the head inquired, with real interest.</p>
			<p>“Because I have an immortal spirit, sir, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Dear me, but all this is very remarkable. Where is it, Manuel?”</p>
			<p>“It is inside me somewhere, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Come, then, let us have it out, for I am curious to see it.”</p>
			<p>“No, it cannot get out exactly, sir, until I am dead.”</p>
			<p>“But what use will it be to you then?” said Misery: “and how can you, who have not ever been dead, be certain as to what happens when one is dead?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I have always heard so, sir.”</p>
			<p>The head shook itself dubiously. “Now from whom of the Léshy, I wonder, can you have been hearing such fantastic stories? I am afraid somebody has been making fun of you, Manuel.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, sir, this is a tenet held by the wisest and most admirable of men.”</p>
			<p>“I see: it was some other man who told you all these drolleries about the eternal importance of mankind,” the head observed, with an unaccountable slackening of interest. “I see: and again, you may notice that the cows and the sheep and the chickens, also, resent extinction strenuously.”</p>
			<p>“But these are creatures of the earth, sir, whereas there is about at any rate some persons a whiff of divinity. Come now, do you not find it so?”</p>
			<p>The head looked graver. “Yes, Manuel, most young people have in them a spark which is divine, but it is living that snuffs this out of all of you, by and large, without bothering Grandfather Death to unpeel spirits like bananas. No, the most of you go with very little spirit, if any, into the grave, and assuredly with not enough spirit to last you forever. No, Manuel, no, I never quarrel with religion, because it is almost the strongest ally I have, but these religious notions rather disgust me sometimes, for if men were immortal then Misery would be immortal, and I could never survive that.”</p>
			<p>“Now you are talking nonsense, sir,” said Manuel, stoutly, “and of all sorts of nonsense cynical nonsense is the worst.”</p>
			<p>“By no means,” replied the head, “since, plainly, it is far worse nonsense to assert that omnipotence would insanely elect to pass eternity with you humans. No, Manuel, I am afraid that your queer theory, about your being stuffed inside with permanent material and so on, does not very plausibly account for either your existence or mine, and that we both stay riddles without answers.”</p>
			<p>“Still, sir,” said Manuel, “inasmuch as there is one thing only which all death’s ravishings have never taken from life, and that thing is the Misery of earth⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Your premiss is indisputable, but what do you deduce from this?”</p>
			<p>Manuel smiled slowly and sleepily. “I deduce, sir, that you, also, who have not ever been dead, cannot possibly be certain as to what happens when one is dead. And so I shall stick to my own opinion about the life to come.”</p>
			<p>“But your opinion is absurd, on the face of it.”</p>
			<p>“That may very well be, sir, but it is much more comfortable to live with than is your opinion, and living is my occupation just now. Dying I shall attend to in its due turn, and, of the two, my opinion is the more pleasant to die with. Thereafter, if your opinion be right, I shall never even know that my opinion was wrong: so that I have everything to gain, in the way of pleasurable anticipations anyhow, and I have nothing whatever to lose, by clinging to the foolish fond old faith which my fathers had before me,” said Manuel, as sturdily as ever.</p>
			<p>“Yes, but how in this world⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, sir,” says Manuel, still smiling, “in this world men are nourished by their beliefs; and it well may be that, yonder also, their sustenance is the same.”</p>
			<p>But at this moment came Reeri (a little crimson naked man, having the head of a monkey) with his cock in one hand and his gnarled club in the other. Necessarily the Blood Demon’s arrival put an end to their talking, for that turn.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
