<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XVI</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>Freydis</i>
			</h4>
			<p>They of Poictesme narrate how Queen Freydis and Count Manuel lived together amicably upon Upper Morven. They tell also how the iniquitous usurper, Duke Asmund, at this time held Bellegarde close at hand, but that his Northmen kept away from Upper Morven, on account of the supernatural beings you were always apt to encounter thereabouts, so that Manuel and Freydis had, at first, no human company.</p>
			<p>“Between now and a while,” said Freydis, “you must be capturing Bellegarde and cutting off Duke Asmund’s ugly head, because by right and by King Ferdinand’s own handwriting all Poictesme belongs to you.”</p>
			<p>“Well, we will let that wait a bit,” says Manuel, “for I do not so heartily wish to be tied down with parchments in a count’s gilded seat as I do to travel everywhither and see the ends of this world and judge them. At all events, dear Freydis, I am content enough for the present, in this little home of ours, and public affairs can wait.”</p>
			<p>“Still, something ought to be done about it,” said Freydis. And, since Manuel displayed an obstinate prejudice against any lethal plague, she put the puckerel curse upon Asmund, by which he was afflicted with all small bodily ills that can intervene between corns and dandruff.</p>
			<p>On Upper Morven Freydis had reared by enchantment a modest home, that was builded of jasper and porphyry and yellow and violet breccia. Inside, the stone walls were everywhere covered with significant traceries in low relief, and were incrusted at intervals with disks and tesserae of turquoise-colored porcelain. The flooring, of course, was of zinc, as a defence against the unfriendly Alfs, who are at perpetual war with Audela, and, moreover, there was a palisade, enclosing all, of peeled willow wands, not buttered but oiled, and fastened with unknotted ribbons.</p>
			<p>Everything was very simple and homelike, and here the servitors of Freydis attended them when there was need. The fallen Queen was not a gray witch⁠—not in appearance certainly, but in her endowments, which were not limited as are the powers of black witches and white witches. She instructed Dom Manuel in the magic of Audela, and she and Manuel had great times together that spring and summer, evoking ancient dis-crowned gods and droll monsters and instructive ghosts to entertain them in the pauses between other pleasures.</p>
			<p>They heard no more, for that turn, of the clay figure to which they had given life, save for the news brought, by a bogglebo, that as the limping gay young fellow went down from Morven the reputable citizenry everywhere were horrified because he went as he was created, stark-naked, and this was not considered respectable. So a large tumble-bug came from the west, out of the quagmires of Philistia and followed after the animated figure, yelping and spluttering, “Morals, not art!” And for that while, the figure went out of Manuel’s saga, thus malodorously accompanied.</p>
			<p>“But we will make a much finer figure,” says Freydis, “so it does not matter.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, by and by,” says Manuel, “but we will let that wait a bit.”</p>
			<p>“You are always saying that nowadays!”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but, my dear, it is so very pleasant to rest here doing nothing serious for a little while, now that my geas is discharged. Presently of course we must be travelling everywhither, and when we have seen the ends of this world, and have judged them, I shall have time, and greater knowledge too, to give to this image making⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is not from any remote strange places, dear Manuel, but from his own land that a man must get the earth for this image making⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, be that as it may, your kisses are to me far more delicious than your magic.”</p>
			<p>“I love to hear you say that, my dearest, but still⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, not at all, for you are really much nicer when you are cuddling so, than when you are running about the world pretending to be pigs and snakes and fireworks, and murdering people with your extravagant sorceries.”</p>
			<p>Saying this, he kissed her, and thus stilled her protests, for in these amiable times Queen Freydis also was at bottom less interested in magic than in kisses. Indeed, there was never any sorceress more loving and tender than Freydis, now that she had become a human woman.</p>
			<p>If ever she was irritable it was only when Manuel confessed, in reply to jealous questionings, that he did not find her quite so beautiful nor so clever as Niafer had been: but this, as Manuel pointed out, could not be helped. For there had never been anybody like Niafer, and it would be nonsense to say otherwise.</p>
			<p>It is possible that Dom Manuel believed this. The rather homely, not intelligent, and in no respect bedazzling servant girl may well have been⁠—in the inexplicable way these things fell out⁠—the woman whom Manuel’s heart had chosen, and who therefore in his eyes for the rest of time must differ from all other persons. Certainly no unastigmatic judge would have decreed this swarthy Niafer fit, as the phrase is, to hold a candle either to Freydis or Alianora: whereas Manuel did not conceal, even from these royal ladies themselves, his personal if unique evaluations.</p>
			<p>To the other side, some say that ladies who are used to hourly admiration cannot endure the passing of a man who seems to admire not quite wholeheartedly. He who does not admire at all is obviously a fool, and not worth bothering about. But to him who admits, “You are well enough,” and makes as though to pass on, there is a mystery attached: and the one way to solve it is to pursue this irritating fellow. Some (reasoning thus) assert that squinting Manuel was aware of this axiom, and that he respected it in all his dealings with Freydis and Alianora. Either way, these theorists did not ever get any verbal buttressing from Dom Manuel. Niafer dead and lost to him, he, without flaunting any unexampled ardors, fell to loving Alianora: and now that Freydis had put off immortality for his kisses, the tall boy had, again, somewhat the air of consenting to accept this woman’s sacrifice, and her loveliness and all her power and wisdom, as being upon the whole the handiest available substitute for Niafer’s sparse charms.</p>
			<p>Yet others declare, more simply, that Dom Manuel was so constituted as to value more cheaply every desire after he had attained it. And these say he noted that⁠—again in the inexplicable way these things fall out⁠—now Manuel possessed the unearthly Queen she had become, precisely as Alianora had become, a not extraordinary person, who in all commerce with her lover dealt as such.</p>
			<p>“But do you really love me, O man of all men?” Freydis would say, “and, this damned Niafer apart, do you love me a little more than you love any other woman?”</p>
			<p>“Why, are there any other women?” says Manuel, in fine surprise. “Oh, to be sure, I suppose there are, but I had forgotten about them. I have not heard or seen or thought of those petticoated creatures since my dear Freydis came.”</p>
			<p>The sorceress purred at this sort of talk, and she rested her head where there seemed a place especially made for it. “I wish I could believe your words, king of my heart. I have to strive so hard, nowadays, to goad you into saying these idiotic suitable dear things: and even when at last you do say them your voice is light and high, and makes them sound as though you were joking.”</p>
			<p>He kissed the thick coil of hair which lay fragrant against his lips. “Do you know, in spite of my joking, I do love you a great deal?”</p>
			<p>“I would practise saying that over to myself,” observed Freydis critically. “You should let your voice break a little after the first three words.”</p>
			<p>“I speak as I feel. I love you, Freydis, and I tell you so.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but you are no longer a perpetual nuisance about it.”</p>
			<p>“Alas, my dear, you are no longer the unattainable Queen of the country on the other side of the fire, and that makes a difference, certainly. It is equally certain that I love you over and above all living women.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but, my dearest, who loves you more than any human tongue can tell?”</p>
			<p>“A peculiarly obstinate and lovely imbecile,” says Manuel; and he did that which seemed suitable.</p>
			<p>Later Freydis sighed luxuriously. “That saves you the trouble of talking, does it not? And you talked so madly and handsomely that first night, when you wanted to get around me on account of the image, but now you do not make me any pretty speeches at all.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, heavens!” said Manuel, “but I am embracing a monomaniac. Dear Freydis, whatever I might say would be perforce the same old words that have been whispered by millions of men to many more millions of women, and my love for you is a quite unparalleled thing which ought not to be travestied by any such shopworn apparel.”</p>
			<p>“Now again you must be putting me off with solemn joking in that light high voice, and there is no faithfulness in that voice, and its talking troubles me.”</p>
			<p>“I speak as I feel. I love you, Freydis, and I tell you so, but I cannot be telling it over and over again every quarter of the hour.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but very certainly this big squinting boy is the most unloquacious and the most stubborn brute that ever lived!”</p>
			<p>“And would you have me otherwise?”</p>
			<p>“No, that is the queer part of it. But it is a grief to me to wonder if you foresaw as much.”</p>
			<p>“I!” says Manuel, jovially. “But what would I be doing with any such finespun policies? My dear, until you comprehend I am the most frank and downright creature that ever lived you do not begin to appreciate me.”</p>
			<p>“I know you are, big boy. But still, I wonder,” Freydis said, “and the wondering is a thin little far-off grief.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
