<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVIII: Farewell to Suskind</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Farewell to Suskind</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>But after dinner Dom Manuel came alone into the Room of Ageus, and equipped himself as the need was, and he climbed out of the charmed window for the last time. His final visit to the depths was horrible, they say, and they relate that of all the deeds of Dom Manuel’s crowded lifetime the thing that he did on this day was the most grim. But he won through all, by virtue of his equipment and his fixed heart. So when Dom Manuel returned he clasped in his left hand a lock of fine straw-colored hair, and on both his hands was blood let from no human veins.</p>
			<p>He looked back for the last time into the gray depths. A crowned girl rose beside him noiselessly, all white and red, and she clasped her bloodied lovely arms about him, and she drew him to her hacked young breasts, and she kissed him for the last time. Then her arms were loosed from about Dom Manuel, and she fell away from him, and was swallowed by the gray sweet-scented depths.</p>
			<p>“And so farewell to you, Queen Suskind,” says Count Manuel. “You who were not human, but knew only the truth of things, could never understand our foolish human notions. Otherwise you would never have demanded the one price I may not pay.”</p>
			<p>“Weep, weep for Suskind!” then said Lubrican, wailing feebly in the gray and April-scented dusk; “for it was she alone who knew the secret of preserving that dissatisfaction which is divine where all else falls away with age into the acquiescence of beasts.”</p>
			<p>“Why, yes, but unhappiness is not the true desire of man,” says Manuel. “I know, for I have had both happiness and unhappiness, and neither contented me.”</p>
			<p>“Weep, weep for Suskind!” then cried the soft and delicate voice of Hinzelmann: “for it was she that would have loved you, Manuel, with that love of which youth dreams, and which exists nowhere upon your side of the window, where all kissed women turn to stupid figures of warm earth, and all love falls away with age into the acquiescence of beasts.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is very true,” says Manuel, “that all my life henceforward will be a wearying business because of long desires for Suskind’s love and Suskind’s lips and the grave beauty of her youth, and for all the high-hearted dissatisfactions of youth. But the Alf charm is lifted from the head of my child, and Melicent will live as Niafer lives, and it will be better for all of us, and I am content.”</p>
			<p>From below came many voices wailing confusedly. “We weep for Suskind. Suskind is slain with the one weapon that might slay her: and all we weep for Suskind, who was the fairest and the wisest and the most unreasonable of queens. Let all the Hidden Children weep for Suskind, whose heart and life was April, and who plotted courageously against the orderings of unimaginative gods, and who has been butchered to preserve the hair of a quite ordinary child.”</p>
			<p>Then said the Count of Poictesme: “And that young Manuel who was in his day a wilful champion, and who fretted under ordered wrongs, and who went everywhither with a high head a-boasting that he followed after his own thinking and his own desire⁠—why, that young fellow also is now silenced and dead. For the well-thought-of Count of Poictesme must be as the will and the faith and as the need of others may dictate: and there is no help for it, and no escape, and our old appearances must be preserved upon this side of the window in order that we may all stay sane.”</p>
			<p>“We weep, and with long weeping raise the dirge for Suskind⁠—!”</p>
			<p>“But I, who do not weep⁠—I raise the dirge for Manuel. For I must henceforward be reasonable in all things, and I shall never be quite discontented any more: and I must feed and sleep as the beasts do, and it may be that I shall even fall to thinking complacently about my death and glorious resurrection. Yes, yes, all this is certain, and I may not ever go a-traveling everywhither to see the ends of this world and judge them: and the desire to do so no longer moves in me, for there is a cloud about my goings, and there is a whispering which follows me, and I too fall away into the acquiescence of beasts. Meanwhile no hair of the child’s head has been injured, and I am content.”</p>
			<p>“Let all the Hidden Children, and all else that lives except the tall gray son of Oriander, whose blood is harsh seawater, weep for Suskind! Suskind is dead, that was unstained by human sin and unredeemed by Christ’s dear blood, and youth has perished from the world. Oh, let us weep, for all the world grows chill and gray as Oriander’s son.”</p>
			<p>“And Oriander too is dead, as I well know that slew him in my hour. Now my hour passes; and I pass with it, to make way for the needs of my children, as he perforce made way for me. And in time these children, and their children after them, pass thus, and always age must be in one mode or another slain by youth. Now why this should be so, I cannot guess, nor do I see that much good comes of it, nor do I find that in myself which warrants any confidences from the most high controlling gods. But I am certain that no hair of the child’s head has been injured; and I am certain that I am content.”</p>
			<p>Thus speaking, the old fellow closed the window.</p>
			<p>And within the moment little Melicent came to molest him, and she was unusually dirty and disheveled, for she had been rolling on the terrace pavement, and had broken half the fastenings from her clothing: and Dom Manuel wiped her nose rather forlornly. Of a sudden he laughed and kissed her. And Count Manuel said he must send for masons to wall up the third window of Ageus, so that it might not ever be opened any more in Count Manuel’s day for him to breathe through it the dim sweet-scented air of spring.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
