<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV: The Troubling Window</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Troubling Window</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It seemed, in a word, that trouble had forgotten Count Manuel. None the less, Dom Manuel opened a window, at his fine home at Storisende, on a fine, sunlit, warmish morning (for this was the last day of April) to confront an outlook more perturbing than his hard vivid eyes had yet lighted on.</p>
			<p>So he regarded it for a while. Considerately Dom Manuel now made experiments with three windows in this Room of Ageus, and found how, in so far as one’s senses could be trusted, the matter stood. Thereafter, as became an intelligent person, he went back to his writing-table, and set about signing the requisitions and warrants and other papers which Ruric the clerk had left there.</p>
			<p>Yet all the while Dom Manuel’s gaze kept lifting to the windows. There were three of them, set side by side, each facing south. They were of thick clear glass, of a sort whose manufacture is a lost art, for these windows had been among the spoils brought back by Duke Asmund from nefarious raidings of Philistia, in which country these windows had once been a part of the temple of Ageus, an immemorial god of the Philistines. For this reason the room was called the Room of Ageus.</p>
			<p>Through these windows Count Manuel could see familiar fields, the long avenue of poplars and the rising hills beyond. All was as it had been yesterday, and as all had been since, nearly three years ago, Count Manuel first entered Storisende. All was precisely as it had been, except, to be sure, that until yesterday Dom Manuel’s table had stood by the farthest window. He could not remember that until today this window had ever been opened, because since his youth had gone out of him Count Manuel was becoming more and more susceptible to draughts.</p>
			<p>“It is certainly very curious,” Dom Manuel said, aloud, when he had finished with his papers.</p>
			<p>He was again approaching the very curious window when his daughter Melicent, now nearly three years old, came noisily, and in an appallingly soiled condition, to molest him. She had bright beauty later, but at three she was one of those children whom human powers cannot keep clean for longer than three minutes.</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel kept for her especial delectation a small flat paddle on his writing-table, and this he now caught up.</p>
			<p>“Out of the room with you, little pest!” he blustered, “for I am busy.”</p>
			<p>So the child, as was her custom, ran back into the hallway, and stood there, no longer in the room, but with one small foot thrust beyond the doorsill, while she laughed up at her big father, and derisively stuck out a tiny curved red tongue at the famed overlord of Poictesme. Then Dom Manuel, as was his custom, got down upon the floor to slap with his paddle at the intruding foot, and Melicent squealed with delight, and pulled back her foot in time to dodge the paddle, and thrust out her other foot beyond the sill, and tried to withdraw that too before it was spanked.</p>
			<p>So it was they gave over a quarter of an hour to rioting, and so it was that grave young Ruric found them. Count Manuel rather sheepishly arose from the floor, and dusted himself, and sent Melicent into the buttery for some sugar cakes. He told Ruric what were the most favorable terms he could offer the burgesses of Narenta, and he gave Ruric the signed requisitions.</p>
			<p>Presently, when Ruric had gone, Dom Manuel went again to the farthest window, opened it, and looked out once more. He shook his head, as one who gives up a riddle. He armed himself, and rode over to Perdigon, whither sainted King Ferdinand had come to consult with Manuel about contriving the assassination of the Moorish general, Al-Mota-wakkil. This matter Dom Manuel deputed to Guivric the Sage; and so was rid of it.</p>
			<p>In addition, Count Manuel had on hand that afternoon an appeal to the judgment of God, over some rather valuable farming lands; but it was remarked by the spectators that he botched the unhorsing and severe wounding of Earl Ladinas, and conducted it rather as though Dom Manuel’s heart were not in the day’s business. Indeed, he had reason, for while supernal mysteries were well enough if one were still a harebrained lad, or even if one set out in due form to seek them, to find such mysteries obtruding themselves unsought into the home-life of a well-thought-of nobleman was discomposing, and to have the windows of his own house playing tricks on him seemed hardly respectable.</p>
			<p>All that month, too, some memory appeared to trouble Dom Manuel, in the back of his mind, while the lords of the Silver Stallion were busied in the pursuit of Othmar and Othmar’s brigands in the Taunenfels: and as soon as Dom Manuel had captured and hanged the last squad of these knaves, Dom Manuel rode home and looked out of the window, to find matters unchanged.</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel meditated. He sounded the gong for Ruric. Dom Manuel talked with the clerk about this and that. Presently Dom Manuel said: “But one stifles here. Open that window.”</p>
			<p>The clerk obeyed. Manuel at the writing-table watched him intently. But in opening the window the clerk had of necessity stood with his back toward Count Manuel, and when Ruric turned, the dark young face of Ruric was impassive.</p>
			<p>Dom Manuel, playing with the jeweled chain of office about his neck, considered Ruric’s face. Then Manuel said: “That is all. You may go.”</p>
			<p>But Count Manuel’s face was troubled, and for the rest of this day he kept an eye on Ruric the young clerk. In the afternoon it was noticeable that this Ruric went often, on one pretext and another, into the Room of Ageus when nobody else was there. The next afternoon, in broad daylight, Manuel detected Ruric carrying into the Room of Ageus, of all things, a lantern. The Count waited a while, then went into the room through its one door. The room was empty. Count Manuel sat down and drummed with his fingers upon the top of his writing-table.</p>
			<p>After a while the third window was opened. Ruric the clerk climbed over the sill. He blew out his lantern.</p>
			<p>“You are braver than I,” Count Manuel said, “it may be. It is certain you are younger. Once, Ruric, I would not have lured any dark and prim-voiced young fellow into attempting this adventure, but would have essayed it myself post-haste. Well, but I have other duties now, and appearances to keep up: and people would talk if they saw a well-thought-of nobleman well settled in life climbing out of his own windows, and there is simply no telling what my wife would think of it”</p>
			<p>The clerk had turned, startled, dropping his lantern with a small crash. His hands went jerkily to his smooth chin, clutching it. His face was white as a leper’s face, and his eyes now were wild and glittering, and his head was drawn low between his black-clad shoulders, so that he seemed a hunchback as he confronted his master. Another queer thing Manuel could notice, and it was that a great lock had been sheared away from the left side of Ruric’s black hair.</p>
			<p>“What have you learned,” says Manuel, “out yonder?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell you,” replied Ruric, laughing sillily, “but in place of it, I will tell you a tale. Yes, yes, Count Manuel, I will tell you a merry story of how a great while ago our common grandmother Eve was washing her children one day near Eden when God called to her. She hid away the children that she had not finished washing: and when the good God asked her if all her children were there, with their meek little heads against His knees, to say their prayers to Him, she answered, Yes. So God told her that what she had tried to hide from God should be hidden from men: and He took away the unwashed children, and made a place for them where everything stays young, and where there is neither good nor evil, because these children are unstained by human sin and unredeemed by Christ’s dear blood.”</p>
			<p>The Count said, frowning: “What drunken nonsense are you talking at broad noon? It is not any foolish tatter of legend that I am requiring of you, my boy, but civil information as to what is to be encountered out yonder.”</p>
			<p>“All freedom and all delight,” young Ruric told him wildly, “and all horror and all rebellion.”</p>
			<p>Then he talked for a while. When Ruric had ended this talking, Count Manuel laughed scornfully, and spoke as became a well-thought-of nobleman.</p>
			<p>Ruric whipped out a knife, and attacked his master, crying, “I follow after my own thinking and my own desires, you old, smug, squinting hypocrite!”</p>
			<p>So Count Manuel caught Ruric by the throat, and with naked hands Dom Manuel strangled the young clerk.</p>
			<p>“Now I have ridded the world of much poison, I think,” Dom Manuel said, aloud, when Ruric lay dead at Manuel’s feet. “In any event, I cannot have that sort of talking about my house. Yet I wish I had not trapped the boy into attempting this adventure, which by rights was my adventure. I did not always avoid adventures.”</p>
			<p>He summoned two to take away the body, and then Manuel went to his bedroom, and was clothed by his lackeys in a tunic of purple silk, and a coronet was placed on his gray head, and the trumpets sounded as Count Manuel sat down to supper. Pages in ermine served him, bringing Manuel’s food upon gold dishes, and pouring red wine and white from golden beakers into Manuel’s gold cup. Skilled music-men played upon viols and harps and flutes while the high Count of Poictesme ate richly seasoned food and talked sedately with his wife.</p>
			<p>They had not fared thus when Manuel had just come from herding swine, and Niafer was a servant trudging on her mistress’ errands, and when these two had eaten very gratefully the Portune’s bread and cheese. They had not any need to be heartened with rare wines when they endured so many perils upon Vraidex and in Dun Vlechlan because of their love for each other. For these two had once loved marvelously. Now minstrels everywhere made songs about their all-conquering love, which had derided death; and nobody denied that, even now, these two got on together amicably.</p>
			<p>But tonight Dame Niafer was fretted, because the pastry-cook was young Ruric’s cousin, and was, she feared, as likely as not to fling off in a huff on account of Dom Manuel’s having strangled the clerk.</p>
			<p>“Well, then do you raise the fellow’s wages,” said Count Manuel.</p>
			<p>“That is easily said, and is exactly like a man. Why, Manuel, you surely know that then the meat-cook, and the butler, too, would be demanding more, and that there would be no end to it.”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear, the boy was talking mad blasphemy, and was for cutting my throat with a great horn-handled knife.”</p>
			<p>“Of course that was very wrong of him,” said Dame Niafer, comfortably, “and not for an instant, Manuel, am I defending his conduct, as I trust you quite understand. But even so, if you had stopped for a moment to think how hard it is to replace a servant nowadays, and how unreliable is the best of them, I believe you would have seen how completely we are at their mercy.”</p>
			<p>Then she told him all about her second waiting-woman, while Manuel said, “Yes,” and “I never heard the like,” and “You were perfectly right, my dear,” and so on, and all the while appeared to be thinking about something else in the back of his mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
