<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>V</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>The Eternal Ambuscade</i>
			</h4>
			<p>Manuel and Niafer came down from Vraidex without hindrance. There was no happier nor more devoted lover anywhere than young Manuel.</p>
			<p>“For we will be married out of hand, dear snip,” he says, “and you will help me to discharge my geas, and afterward we will travel everywhither and into the last limits of earth, so that we may see the ends of this world and may judge them.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps we had better wait until next spring, when the roads will be better, Manuel, but certainly we will be married out of hand.”</p>
			<p>In earnest of this, Niafer permitted Manuel to kiss her again, and young Manuel said, for the twenty-second time, “There is nowhere any happiness like my happiness, nor any love like my love.”</p>
			<p>Thus speaking, and thus disporting themselves, they came leisurely to the base of the gray mountain and to the old maple-trees, under which they found two persons waiting. One was a tall man mounted on a white horse, and leading a riderless black horse. His hat was pulled down about his head so that his face could not be clearly seen.</p>
			<p>Now the companion that was with him had the appearance of a bare-headed youngster, with dark red hair, and his face too was hidden as he sat by the roadway trimming his long finger-nails with a small green-handled knife.</p>
			<p>“Hail, friends,” said Manuel, “and for whom are you waiting here?”</p>
			<p>“I wait for one to ride on this black horse of mine,” replied the mounted stranger. “It was decreed that the first person who passed this way must be his rider, but you two come abreast. So do you choose between you which one rides.”</p>
			<p>“Well, but it is a fine steed surely,” Manuel said, “and a steed fit for Charlemagne or Hector or any of the famous champions of the old time.”</p>
			<p>“Each one of them has ridden upon this black horse of mine,” replied the stranger.</p>
			<p>Niafer said, “I am frightened.” And above them a furtive wind began to rustle in the torn, discolored maple-leaves.</p>
			<p>“⁠—For it is a fine steed and an old steed,” the stranger went on, “and a tireless steed that bears all away. It has the fault, some say, that its riders do not return, but there is no pleasing everybody.”</p>
			<p>“Friend,” Manuel said, in a changed voice, “who are you, and what is your name?”</p>
			<p>“I am half-brother to Miramon Lluagor, lord of the nine sleeps, but I am lord of another kind of sleeping; and as for my name, it is the name that is in your thoughts and the name which most troubles you, and the name which you think about most often.”</p>
			<p>There was silence. Manuel worked his lips foolishly. “I wish we had not walked abreast,” he said. “I wish we had remained among the bright dreams.”</p>
			<p>“All persons voice some regret or another at meeting me. And it does not ever matter.”</p>
			<p>“But if there were no choosing in the affair, I could make shift to endure it, either way. Now one of us, you tell me, must depart with you. If I say, ‘Let Niafer be that one,’ I must always recall that saying with self-loathing.”</p>
			<p>“But I too say it!” Niafer was petting him and trembling.</p>
			<p>“Besides,” observed the rider of the white horse, “you have a choice of sayings.”</p>
			<p>“The other saying,” Manuel replied, “I cannot utter. Yet I wish I were not forced to confess this. It sounds badly. At all events, I love Niafer better than I love any other person, but I do not value Niafer’s life more highly than I value my own life, and it would be nonsense to say so. No; my life is very necessary to me, and there is a geas upon me to make a figure in this world before I leave it.”</p>
			<p>“My dearest,” says Niafer, “you have chosen wisely.”</p>
			<p>The veiled horseman said nothing at all. But he took off his hat, and the beholders shuddered. The kinship to Miramon was apparent, you could see the resemblance, but they had never seen in Miramon Lluagor’s face what they saw here.</p>
			<p>Then Niafer bade farewell to Manuel with pitiable whispered words. They kissed. For an instant Manuel stood motionless. He queerly moved his mouth, as though it were stiff and he were trying to make it more supple. Thereafter Manuel, very sick and desperate looking, did what was requisite. So Niafer went away with Grandfather Death, in Manuel’s stead.</p>
			<p>“My heart cracks in me now,” says Manuel, forlornly considering his hands, “but better she than I. Still, this is a poor beginning in life, for yesterday great wealth and to-day great love was within my reach, and now I have lost both.”</p>
			<p>“But you did not go the right way about to win success in anything,” says the remaining stranger.</p>
			<p>And now this other stranger arose from the trimming of his long fingernails; and you could see this was a tall, lean youngster (though not so tall as Manuel, and nothing like so stalwart), with ruddy cheeks, wide-set brown eyes, and crinkling, rather dark red hair.</p>
			<p>Then Manuel rubbed his wet hands as clean as might be, and this boy walked on a little way with Manuel, talking of that which had been and of some things which were to be. And Manuel said, “Now assuredly, Horvendile, since that is your name, such talking is insane talking, and no comfort whatever to me in my grief at losing Niafer.”</p>
			<p>“This is but the beginning of your losses, Manuel, for I think that a little by a little you will lose everything which is desirable, until you shall have remaining at the last only a satiation, and a weariness, and an uneasy loathing of all that the human wisdom of your elders shall have induced you to procure.”</p>
			<p>“But, Horvendile, can anybody foretell the future? Or can it be that Miramon spoke seriously in saying that fate also was enleagued to forbid the leaving of this mountain?”</p>
			<p>“No, Manuel, I do not say that I am fate nor any of the Léshy, but rather it seems to me that I am insane. So perhaps the less attention you pay to my talking, the better. For I must tell you that this wasted country side, this mountain, this road, and these old maples, and that rock yonder, appear to me to be things I have imagined, and that you, and the Niafer whom you have just disposed of so untidily, and Miramon and his fair shrew, and all of you, appear to me to be persons I have imagined; and all the living in this world appears to me to be only a notion of mine.”</p>
			<p>“Why, then, certainly I would say, or rather, I would think it unnecessary to say, that you are insane.”</p>
			<p>“You speak without hesitation, and it is through your ability to settle such whimseys out of hand that you will yet win, it may be, to success.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but,” asked Manuel, slowly, “what is success?”</p>
			<p>“In your deep mind, I think, that question is already answered.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly I have my notion, but it was about your notion I was asking.”</p>
			<p>Horvendile looked grave, and yet whimsical too. “Why, I have heard somewhere,” says he, “that at its uttermost this success is but the strivings of an ape reft of his tail, and grown rusty at climbing, who yet feels himself to be a symbol and the frail representative of Omnipotence in a place that is not home.”</p>
			<p>Manuel appeared to reserve judgment. “How does the successful ape employ himself, in these not quite friendly places?”</p>
			<p>“He strives blunderingly, from mystery to mystery, with pathetic makeshifts, not understanding anything, greedy in all desires, and honeycombed with poltroonery, and yet ready to give all, and to die fighting for the sake of that undemonstrable idea, about his being Heaven’s vicar and heir.”</p>
			<p>Manuel shook his small bright head. “You use too many long words. But so far I can understand you, that is not the sort of success I want. No, I am Manuel, and I must follow after my own thinking and my own desire, without considering other people and their notions of success.”</p>
			<p>“As for denying yourself consideration for other people, I am of the opinion, after witnessing your recent disposal of your sweetheart, that you are already tolerably expert in that sort of abnegation.”</p>
			<p>“Hah, but you do not know what is seething here,” replied Manuel, smiting his broad chest. “And I shall not tell you of it, Horvendile, since you are not fate nor any of the Léshy, to give me my desire.”</p>
			<p>“What would be your desire?”</p>
			<p>“My wish would be for me always to obtain whatever I may wish for. Yes, Horvendile, I have often wondered why, in the old legends, when three wishes were being offered, nobody ever made that sensible and economical wish the first of all.”</p>
			<p>“What need is there to trouble the Léshy about that foolish wish when it is always possible, at a paid price, to obtain whatever one desires? You have but to go about it in this way.” And Horvendile told Manuel a queer and dangerous thing. Then Horvendile said sadly: “So much knowledge I can deny nobody at Michaelmas. But I must tell you the price also, and it is that with the achieving of each desire you will perceive its worth.”</p>
			<p>Thus speaking, Horvendile parted the thicket beside the roadway. A beautiful dusk-colored woman waited there, in a green-blue robe, and on her head was a blue coronet surmounted with green feathers: she carried a vase. Horvendile stepped forward, and the thicket closed behind him, concealing Horvendile and this woman.</p>
			<p>Manuel, looking puzzled, went on a little way, and when he was assured of being alone he flung himself face downward and wept. The reason of this was, they relate, that young Manuel had loved Niafer as he could love nobody else. Then he arose, and went toward the pool of Haranton, on his way homeward, after having failed in everything.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
