<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Ascent of Vraidex</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Now it was evening, and the two sought shelter in a queer windmill by the roadside, finding there a small wrinkled old man in a patched coat. He gave them lodgings for the night, and honest bread and cheese, but for his own supper he took frogs out of his bosom, and roasted these in the coals.</p>
			<p>Then the two boys sat in the doorway, and watched that night’s dreams going down from Vraidex to their allotted work in the world of visionary men, to whom these dreams were passing in the form of incredible white vapors. Sitting thus, the lads fell to talking of this and the other, and Manuel found that Niafer was a pagan of the old faith: and this, said Manuel, was an excellent thing.</p>
			<p>“For, when we have achieved our adventure,” says Manuel, “and must fight against each other for the Count’s daughter, I shall certainly kill you, dear Niafer. Now if you were a Christian, and died thus unholily in trying to murder me, you would have to go thereafter to the unquenchable flames of purgatory or to even hotter flames: but among the pagans all that die valiantly in battle go straight to the pagan paradise. Yes, yes, your abominable religion is a great comfort to me.”</p>
			<p>“It is a comfort to me also, Manuel. But, as a Christian, you ought not ever to have any kind words for heathenry.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but,” says Manuel, “while my mother Dorothy of the White Arms was the most zealous sort of Christian, my father, you must know, was not a communicant.”</p>
			<p>“Who was your father, Manuel?”</p>
			<p>“No less a person than the Swimmer, Oriander, who is in turn the son of Mimir.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, to be sure! and who is Mimir?”</p>
			<p>“Well, Niafer, that is a thing not very generally known, but he is famed for his wise head.”</p>
			<p>“And, Manuel, who, while we speak of it, is Oriander?”</p>
			<p>Said Manuel:</p>
			<p>“Oh, out of the void and the darkness that is peopled by Mimir’s brood, from the ultimate silent fastness of the desolate deep-sea gloom, and the peace of that ageless gloom, blind Oriander came, from Mimir, to be at war with the sea and to jeer at the sea’s desire. When tempests are seething and roaring from the Aesir’s inverted bowl all seamen have heard his shouting and the cry that his mirth sends up: when the rim of the sea tilts up, and the world’s roof wavers down, his face gleams white where distraught waves smite the Swimmer they may not tire. No eyes were allotted this Swimmer, but in blindness, with ceaseless jeers, he battles till time be done with, and the love-songs of earth be sung, and the very last dirge be sung, and a baffled and outworn sea begrudgingly own Oriander alone may mock at the might of its ire.”</p>
			<p>“Truly, Manuel, that sounds like a parent to be proud of, and not at all like a church-going parent, and of course his blindness would account for that squint of yours. Yes, certainly it would. So do you tell me about this blind Oriander, and how he came to meet your mother Dorothy of the White Arms, as I suppose he did somewhere or other.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” says Manuel, “for Oriander never leaves off swimming, and so he must stay always in the water. So he never actually met my mother, and she married Emmerick, who was my nominal father. But such and such things happened.”</p>
			<p>Then Manuel told Niafer all about the circumstances of Manuel’s birth in a cave, and about the circumstances of Manuel’s upbringing in and near Rathgor and the two boys talked on and on, while the unborn dreams went drifting by outside; and within the small wrinkled old man sat listening with a very doubtful smile, and saying never a word.</p>
			<p>“And why is your hair cut so queerly, Manuel?”</p>
			<p>“That, Niafer, we need not talk about, in part because it is not going to be cut that way any longer, and in part because it is time for bed.”</p>
			<p>The next morning Manuel and Niafer paid the ancient price which their host required. They left him cobbling shoes, and, still ascending, encountered no more bones, for nobody else had climbed so high. They presently came to a bridge whereon were eight spears, and the bridge was guarded by the Serpent of the West. This snake was striped with blue and gold, and wore on his head a great cap of humming-birds’ feathers.</p>
			<p>Manuel half drew his sword to attack this serpentine design, with which Miramon Lluagor made sleeping terrible for the red tribes that hunt and fish behind the Hesperides. But Manuel looked at Niafer.</p>
			<p>And Niafer displayed a drolly marked small turtle, saying, “Maskanako, do you not recognize Tulapin, the turtle that never lies?”</p>
			<p>The serpent howled, as though a thousand dogs had been kicked simultaneously, and the serpent fled.</p>
			<p>“Why, snip, did he do that?” asked Manuel, smiling sleepily and gravely, as for the third time he found that his charmed sword Flamberge was unneeded.</p>
			<p>“Truly, Manuel, nobody knows why this serpent dreads the turtle: but our concern is less with the cause than with the effect. Meanwhile, those eight spears are not to be touched on any account.”</p>
			<p>“Is what you have a quite ordinary turtle?” asked Manuel, meekly.</p>
			<p>Niafer said: “Of course it is. Where would I be getting extraordinary turtles?”</p>
			<p>“I had not previously considered that problem,” replied Manuel, “but the question is certainly unanswerable.”</p>
			<p>They then sat down to lunch, and found the bread and cheese they had purchased from the little old man that morning was turned to lumps of silver and virgin gold in Manuel’s knapsack. “This is very disgusting,” said Manuel, “and I do not wonder my back was near breaking.” He flung away the treasure, and they lunched frugally on blackberries.</p>
			<p>From among the entangled blackberry bushes came the glowing Serpent of the South, who was the smallest and loveliest and most poisonous of Miramon’s designs. With this snake Niafer dealt curiously. Niafer employed three articles in the transaction: two of these things are not to be talked about, but the third was a little figure carved in hazel-wood.</p>
			<p>“Certainly you are very clever,” said Manuel, when they had passed this serpent. “Still, your employment of those first two articles was unprecedented, and your disposal of the carved figure absolutely embarrassed me.”</p>
			<p>“Before such danger as confronted us, Manuel, it does not pay to be squeamish,” replied Niafer, “and my exorcism was good Dirgham.”</p>
			<p>And many other adventures and perils they encountered, such as if all were told would make a long and most improbable history. But they had clear favorable weather, and they won through each pinch, by one or another fraud which Niafer evolved the instant that gullery was needed. Manuel was loud in his praises of the surprising cleverness of his flat-faced dark comrade, and protested that hourly he loved Niafer more and more: and Manuel said too that he was beginning to think more and more distastefully of the time when Niafer and Manuel would have to fight for the Count of Arnaye’s daughter until one of them had killed the other.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the sword Flamberge stayed in its curious blue scabbard.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
