<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: The Crown of Wisdom</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Crown of Wisdom</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>So did it come about that as King Helmas rode a-hunting in Nevet under the Hunter’s Moon he came upon a gigantic and florid young fellow, who was very decently clad in black, and had a queer droop to his left eye, and who appeared to be wandering at adventure in the autumn woods: and the King remembered what had been foretold.</p>
			<p>Says King Helmas to Manuel the swineherd, “What is that I see in your pocket wrapped in red silk?”</p>
			<p>“It is a feather, King, wrapped in a bit of my sister’s best petticoat.”</p>
			<p>“Now, glory be to your dark magics, friend, and at what price will you sell me that feather?”</p>
			<p>“But a feather is no use to anybody, King, for, as you see, it is a quite ordinary feather?”</p>
			<p>“Come, come!” the King says, shrewdly, “do people anywhere wrap ordinary feathers in red silk? Friend, do not think to deceive King Helmas of Albania, or it will be worse for you. I perfectly recognize that shining white feather as the feather which was moulted in this forest by the Zhar-Ptitza Bird, in the old time before my grandfathers came into this country. For it was foretold that such a young sorcerer as you would bring to me, who have long been the silliest King that ever reigned over the Peohtes, this feather which confers upon its owner perfect wisdom: and for you to dispute the prophecy would be blasphemous.”</p>
			<p>“I do not dispute your silliness, King Helmas, nor do I dispute anybody’s prophecies in a world wherein nothing is certain.”</p>
			<p>“One thing at least is certain,” remarked King Helmas, frowning uglily, “and it is that among the Peohtes all persons who dispute our prophecies are burned at the stake.”</p>
			<p>Manuel shivered slightly, and said: “It seems to me a quite ordinary feather: but your prophets⁠—most deservedly, no doubt⁠—are in higher repute for wisdom than I am, and burning is a discomfortable death. So I recall what a madman told me, and, since you are assured that this is the Zhar-Ptitza’s feather, I will sell it to you for ten sequins.”</p>
			<p>King Helmas shook a disapproving face. “That will not do at all, and your price is out of reason, because it was foretold that for this feather you would ask ten thousand sequins.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I am particularly desirous not to appear irreligious now that I have become a young sorcerer. So you may have the feather at your own price, rather than let the prophecies remain unfulfilled.”</p>
			<p>Then Manuel rode pillion with a king who was unwilling to let Manuel out of his sight, and they went thus to the castle called Brunbelois. They came to two doors with pointed arches, set side by side, the smaller being for foot passengers, and the other for horsemen. Above was an equestrian statue in a niche, and a great painted window with traceries of hearts and thistles.</p>
			<p>They entered the larger door, and that afternoon twelve heralds, in bright red tabards that were embroidered with golden thistles, rode out of this door, to proclaim the fulfilment of the prophecy as to the Zhar-Ptitza’s feather, and that afternoon the priests of the Peohtes gave thanks in all their curious underground temples. The common people, who had for the last score of years taken shame to themselves for living under such a foolish king, embraced one another, and danced, and sang patriotic songs at every street-corner: the Lower Council met, and voted that, out of deference of his majesty, All Fools’ Day should be stricken from the calendar: and Queen Pressina (one of the water folk) declared there were two ways of looking at everything, the while that she burned a quantity of private papers. Then at night were fireworks, the King made a speech, and to Manuel was delivered in wheelbarrows the sum of ten thousand sequins.</p>
			<p>Thereafter Manuel abode for a month at the court of King Helmas, noting whatever to this side and to that side seemed most notable. Manuel was well liked by the nobility, and when the barons and the fine ladies assembled in the evening for pavanes and branles and pazzamenos nobody danced more statelily than <span xml:lang="fr">Messire</span> Manuel. He had a quiet way with the ladies, and with the barons a way of simplicity which was vastly admired in a sorcerer so potent that his magic had secured the long sought Zhar-Ptitza’s feather. “But the most learned,” as King Helmas justly said, “are always the most modest.”</p>
			<p>Helmas now wore the feather from the wing of the miller’s goose affixed to the front of Helmas’ second best crown, because that was the one he used to give judgments in. And when it was noised abroad that King Helmas had the Zhar-Ptitza’s feather, the Peohtes came gladly to be judged, and the neighboring kings began to submit to him their more difficult cases, and all his judgings were received with reverence, because everybody knew that King Helmas’ wisdom was now infallible, and that to criticize his verdict as to anything was merely to expose your own stupidity.</p>
			<p>And now that doubt of himself had gone out of his mind, Helmas lived untroubled, and his digestion improved, and his loving-kindness was infinite, because he could not be angry with the pitiable creatures haled before him, when he considered how little able they were to distinguish between wisdom and unwisdom where Helmas was omniscient: and all his doings were merciful and just, and his people praised him. Even the Queen conceded that, once you were accustomed to his ways, and exercised some firmness about being made a doormat of, and had it understood once for all that meals could not be kept waiting for him, she supposed there might be women worse off.</p>
			<p>And Manuel got clay and modeled the figure of a young man which had the features and the wise look of King Helmas.</p>
			<p>“I can see the resemblance,” the King said, “but it does not half do me justice, and, besides, why have you made a young whippersnapper of me, and mixed up my appearance with your appearance?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” said Manuel, “but I suppose it is because of a geas which is upon me to make myself a splendid and admirable young man in every respect, and not an old man.”</p>
			<p>“And does the sculpture satisfy you?” asks the King, smiling wisely.</p>
			<p>“No, I like this figure well enough, now it is done, but it is not, I somehow know, the figure I desire to make. No, I must follow after my own thinking and my own desire, and wisdom is not requisite to me.”</p>
			<p>“You artists!” said the King, as people always say that “Now I would consider that, for all the might of your sorceries, wisdom is rather clamantly requisite to you, <span xml:lang="fr">Messire</span> Manuel, who inform me you must soon be riding hence to find elsewhere the needful look for your figure. For thus to be riding about this world of men, in search of a shade of expression, and without even being certain of what look you are looking for, does not appear to me to be good sense.”</p>
			<p>But young Manuel replied sturdily:</p>
			<p>“I ride to encounter what life has in store for me, who am made certain of this at least, that all high harvests which life withholds for me spring from a seed which I sow⁠—and reap. For my geas is potent, and, late or soon, I serve my geas, and take my doom as the pay well-earned that is given as pay to me, for the figure I make in this world of men.</p>
			<p>“This figure, foreseen and yet hidden away from me, glimpsed from afar in the light of a dream⁠—will I love it, once more, or will loathing awake in me after its visage is plainlier seen? No matter: as fate says, so say I, who serve my geas, and gain in time such payment, at worst, as is honestly due to me, for the figure I make in this world of men.</p>
			<p>“To its shaping I consecrate youth that is strong in me, ardently yielding youth’s last least gift, who know that all grace which the gods have allotted me avails me in naught if it fails me in this. For all that a man has, that must I bring to the image I shape, that my making may live when time unmakes me and death dissevers me from the figure I make in this world of men.”</p>
			<p>To this the King rather drily replied: “There is something in what you say. But that something is, I can assure you, not wisdom.”</p>
			<p>So everyone was satisfied in Albania except Manuel, who declared that he was pleased but not contented by the image he had made in the likeness of King Helmas.</p>
			<p>“Besides,” they told him, “you look as though your mind were troubling you about something.”</p>
			<p>“In fact, I am puzzled to see a foolish person made wise in all his deeds and speeches by this wisdom being expected of him.”</p>
			<p>“But that is a cause for rejoicing, and for applauding the might of your sorceries, <span xml:lang="fr">Messire</span> Manuel, whereas you are plainly thinking of vexatious matters.”</p>
			<p>Manuel replied, “I think that it is not right to rob anybody of anything, and I reflect that wisdom weighs exactly the weight of a feather.”</p>
			<p>Then Manuel went into King Helmas’ chicken yard, and caught a goose, and plucked from its wing a feather. Manuel went glitteringly now, in brocaded hose, and with gold spurs on his heels: the figure which he had made in the likeness of King Helmas was packed in an expensive knapsack of ornamented leather, and tall shining Manuel rode on a tall dappled horse when he departed southward, for Manuel nowadays had money to spare.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
