<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I: How Manuel Left the Mire</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">How Manuel Left the Mire</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>They of Poictesme narrate that in the old days when miracles were as common as fruit pies, young Manuel was a swineherd, living modestly in attendance upon the miller’s pigs. They tell also that Manuel was content enough: he knew not of the fate which was reserved for him.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile in all the environs of Rathgor, and in the thatched villages of Lower Targamon, he was well liked: and when the young people gathered in the evening to drink brandy and eat nuts and gingerbread, nobody danced more merrily than Squinting Manuel. He had a quiet way with the girls, and with the men a way of solemn, blinking simplicity which caused the more hasty in judgment to consider him a fool. Then, too, young Manuel was very often detected smiling sleepily over nothing, and his gravest care in life appeared to be that figure which Manuel had made out of marsh clay from the pool of Haranton.</p>
			<p>This figure he was continually reshaping and realtering. The figure stood upon the margin of the pool; and near by were two stones overgrown with moss, and supporting a cross of old worm-eaten wood, which commemorated what had been done there.</p>
			<p>One day, toward autumn, as Manuel was sitting in this place, and looking into the deep still water, a stranger came, and he wore a fierce long sword that interfered deplorably with his walking.</p>
			<p>“Now I wonder what it is you find in that dark pool to keep you staring so?” the stranger asked, first of all.</p>
			<p>“I do not very certainly know,” replied Manuel “but mistily I seem to see drowned there the loves and the desires and the adventures I had when I wore another body than this. For the water of Haranton, I must tell you, is not like the water of other fountains, and curious dreams engender in this pool.”</p>
			<p>“I speak no ill against oneirologya, although broad noon is hardly the best time for its practise,” declared the snub-nosed stranger. “But what is that thing?” he asked, pointing.</p>
			<p>“It is the figure of a man, which I have modeled and remodeled, sir, but cannot seem to get exactly to my liking. So it is necessary that I keep laboring at it until the figure is to my thinking and my desire.”</p>
			<p>“But, Manuel, what need is there for you to model it at all?”</p>
			<p>“Because my mother, sir, was always very anxious for me to make a figure in the world, and when she lay a-dying I promised her that I would do so, and then she put a geas upon me to do it.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, to be sure! but are you certain it was this kind of figure she meant?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, for I have often heard her say that, when I grew up, she wanted me to make myself a splendid and admirable young man in every respect. So it is necessary that I make the figure of a young man, for my mother was not of these parts, but a woman of Ath Cliath, and so she put a geas upon me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, you had mentioned this geas, and I am wondering what sort of a something is this geas.”</p>
			<p>“It is what you might call a bond or an obligation, sir, only it is of the particularly strong and unreasonable and affirmative and secret sort which the Virbolg use.”</p>
			<p>The stranger now looked from the figure to Manuel, and the stranger deliberated the question (which later was to puzzle so many people) if any human being could be as simple as Manuel appeared. Manuel at twenty was not yet the burly giant he became. But already he was a gigantic and florid person, so tall that the heads of few men reached to his shoulder; a person of handsome exterior, high featured and blond, having a narrow small head, and vivid light blue eyes, and the chest of a stallion; a person whose left eyebrow had an odd oblique droop, so that the stupendous boy at his simplest appeared to be winking the information that he was in jest.</p>
			<p>All in all, the stranger found this young swineherd ambiguous; and there was another curious thing too which the stranger noticed about Manuel.</p>
			<p>“Is it on account of this geas,” asked the stranger, “that a great lock has been sheared away from your yellow hair?”</p>
			<p>In an instant Manuel’s face became dark and wary. “No,” he said, “that has nothing to do with my geas, and we must not talk about that”</p>
			<p>“Now you are a queer lad to be having such an obligation upon your head, and to be having well-nigh half the hair cut away from your head, and to be having inside your head such notions. And while small harm has ever come from humoring one’s mother, yet I wonder at you, Manuel, that you should sit here sleeping in the sunlight among your pigs, and be giving your young time to improbable sculpture and stagnant water, when there is such a fine adventure awaiting you, and when the Norns are foretelling such high things about you as they spin the thread of your living.”</p>
			<p>“Hah, glory be to God, friend, but what is this adventure?”</p>
			<p>“The adventure is that the Count of Arnaye’s daughter yonder has been carried off by a magician, and that the high Count Demetrios offers much wealth and broad lands, and his daughter’s hand in marriage, too, to the lad that will fetch back this lovely girl.”</p>
			<p>“I have heard talk of this in the kitchen of Arnaye, where I sometimes sell them a pig. But what are such matters to a swineherd?”</p>
			<p>“My lad, you are today a swineherd drowsing in the sun, as yesterday you were a baby squalling in the cradle, but tomorrow you will be neither of these if there by any truth whatever in the talking of the Norns as they gossip at the foot of their ash-tree beside the door of the Sylan’s House.”</p>
			<p>Manuel appeared to accept the inevitable. He bowed his brightly colored high head, saying gravely: “All honor be to Urdhr and Verdandi and Skuld! If I am decreed to be the champion that is to rescue the Count of Arnaye’s daughter, it is ill arguing with the Norns. Come, tell me now, how do you call this doomed magician, and how does one get to him to sever his wicked head from his foul body?”</p>
			<p>“Men speak of him as Miramon Lluagor, lord of the nine kinds of sleep and prince of the seven madnesses. He lives in mythic splendor at the top of the gray mountain called Vraidex, where he contrives all manner of illusions, and, in particular, designs the dreams of men.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the kitchen of Arnaye, also, such was the report concerning this Miramon: and not a person in the kitchen denied that this Miramon is an ugly customer.”</p>
			<p>“He is the most subtle of magicians. None can withstand him, and nobody can pass the terrible serpentine designs which Miramon has set to guard the gray scarps of Vraidex, unless one carries the more terrible sword Flamberge, which I have here in its blue scabbard.”</p>
			<p>“Why, then, it is you who must rescue the Count’s daughter.”</p>
			<p>“No, that would not do at all: for there is in the life of a champion too much of turmoil and of buffetings and murderings to suit me, who am a peace-loving person. Besides, to the champion who rescues the Lady Gisèle will be given her hand in marriage, and as I have a wife, I know that to have two wives would lead to twice too much dissension to suit me, who am a peace-loving person. So I think it is you who had better take the sword and the adventure.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” Manuel said, “much wealth and broad lands and a lovely wife are finer things to ward than a parcel of pigs.”</p>
			<p>So Manuel girded on the charmed scabbard, and with the charmed sword he sadly demolished the clay figure he could not get quite right. Then Manuel sheathed Flamberge, and Manuel cried farewell to the pigs.</p>
			<p>“I shall not ever return to you, my pigs, because, at worst, to die valorously is better than to sleep out one’s youth in the sun. A man has but one life. It is his all. Therefore I now depart from you, my pigs, to win me a fine wife and much wealth and leisure wherein to discharge my geas. And when my geas is lifted I shall not come back to you, my pigs, but I shall travel everywhither, and into the last limits of earth, so that I may see the ends of this world and may judge them while my life endures. For after that, they say, I judge not, but am judged: and a man whose life has gone out of him, my pigs, is not even good bacon.”</p>
			<p>“So much rhetoric for the pigs,” says the stranger, “is well enough, and likely to please them. But come, is there not some girl or another to whom you should be saying goodbye with other things than words?”</p>
			<p>“No, at first I thought I would also bid farewell to Suskind, who is sometimes friendly with me in the twilight wood, but upon reflection it seems better not to. For Suskind would probably weep, and exact promises of eternal fidelity, and otherwise dampen the ardor with which I look toward tomorrow and the winning of the wealthy Count of Arnaye’s lovely daughter.”</p>
			<p>“Now, to be sure, you are a queer cool candid fellow, you young Manuel, who will go far, whether for good or evil!”</p>
			<p>“I do not know about good or evil. But I am Manuel, and I shall follow after my own thinking and my own desires.”</p>
			<p>“And certainly it is no less queer you should be saying that: for, as everybody knows, that used to be the favorite byword of your namesake the famous Count Manuel who is so newly dead in Poictesme yonder.”</p>
			<p>At that the young swineherd nodded, gravely. “I must accept the omen, sir. For, as I interpret it, my great namesake has courteously made way for me, in order that I may go far beyond him.”</p>
			<p>Then Manuel cried farewell and thanks to the mild-mannered, snub-nosed stranger, and Manuel left the miller’s pigs to their own devices by the pool of Haranton, and Manuel marched away in his rags to meet a fate that was long talked about.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
