<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>XVII</h3>
			<h4>
				<i>Magic of the Image-Makers</i>
			</h4>
			<p>It was presently noised abroad that Queen Freydis of Audela had become a human woman; and thereafter certain enchanters came to Upper Morven, to seek her counsel and her favor and the aid of Schamir. These were the enchanters, Manuel was told, who made images, to which they now and then contrived⁠—nobody seemed to know quite how, and least of all did the thaumaturgists themselves⁠—to impart life.</p>
			<p>Once Manuel went with Freydis into a dark place where some of these magic-workers were at labor. By the light of a charcoal fire, clay images were ruddily discernible; before these the enchanters moved unhumanly clad, and doing things which, mercifully perhaps, were veiled from Manuel by the peculiarly perfumed obscurity.</p>
			<p>As Manuel entered the gallery one of the magic-workers was chaunting shrilly in the darkness below. “It is the unfinished Rune of the Blackbirds,” says Freydis, in a whisper.</p>
			<p>Below them the troubled wailing continued:</p>
			<p>“⁠—Crammed and squeezed, so entombed (on some wager I hazard), in spite of scared squawking and mutter, after the fashion that lean-faced Rajah dealt with trapped heroes, once, in Calcutta. Dared you break the crust and bullyrag ’em⁠—hot, fierce and angry, what wide beaks buzz plain Saxon as ever spoke Witenagemot! Yet, singing, they sing as no white bird does (where none rears phoenix) as near perfection as nature gets, or, if scowls bar platitude, notes for which there is no rejection in banks whose coinage⁠—oh, neat!⁠—is gratitude.”</p>
			<p>Said, in the darkness, another enchanter:</p>
			<p>“But far from their choiring the high King sat, in a gold-faced vest and a gold-laced hat, counting heaped monies, and dreaming of more francs and sequins and Louis d’or. Meanwhile the Queen on that fateful night, though avowing her lack of all appetite, was still at table, where, rumor said, she was smearing her seventh slice of bread (thus each turgescible rumor thrives at court) with gold from the royal hives. Through the slumberous pare, under arching trees, to her labors went singing the maid Dénise⁠—”</p>
			<p>A third broke in here, saying:</p>
			<p>“And she sang of how subtle and bitter and bright was a beast brought forth, that was clad with the splendor and light of the cold fair ends of the north, like a fleshly blossom more white than augmenting tempests that go, with thunder for weapon, to ravage the strait waste fastness of snow. She sang how that all men on earth said, whether its mistress at morn went forth or waited till night⁠—whether she strove through the foam and wreckage of shallow and firth, or couched in glad fields of corn, or fled from all human delight⁠—that thither it likewise would roam.”</p>
			<p>Now a fourth began:</p>
			<p>“Thus sang Dénise, what while the siccant sheets and coverlets that pillowed kingly dreams, with curious undergarbs of royalty, she neatly ranged: and dreamed not of that doom which waited, yet unborn, to strike men dumb with perfect awe. As when the seventh wave poises, and sunlight cleaves it through and through with gold, as though to gild oncoming death for him that sees foredoomed⁠—and, gasping, sees death high and splendid!⁠—while the tall wave bears down, and its shattering makes an end of him: thus poised the sable bird while one might count one, two, and three, and four, and five, and six, but hardly seven⁠—”</p>
			<p>So they continued; but Manuel listened to no more. “What is the meaning of all this?” he asked, of Freydis.</p>
			<p>“It is an experimental incantation,” she replied, “in that it is a bit of unfinished magic for which the proper words have not yet been found: but between now and a while they will be stumbled on, and then this rune will live perpetually, surviving all those rhymes that are infected with thought and intelligent meanings such as are repugnant to human nature.”</p>
			<p>“Are words, then, so important and enduring?”</p>
			<p>“Why, Manuel, I am surprised at you! In what else, pray, does man differ from the other animals except in that he is used by words?”</p>
			<p>“Now I would have said that words are used by men.”</p>
			<p>“There is give and take, of course, but in the main man is more subservient to words than they are to him. Why, do you but think of such terrible words as religion and duty and love, and patriotism and art, and honor and common-sense, and of what these tyrannizing words do to and make of people!”</p>
			<p>“No, that is chop-logic: for words are only transitory noises, whereas man is the child of God, and has an immortal spirit.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, my dearest, I know you believe that, and I think it is delightfully quaint and sweet of you. But, as I was saying, a man has only the body of an animal to get experiences in, and the brain of an animal to think them over with, so that the thoughts and opinions of the poor dear must remain always those of a more or less intelligent animal. But his words are very often magic, as you will comprehend by and by when I have made you the greatest of image-makers.”</p>
			<p>“Well, well, but we can let that wait a bit,” said Manuel.</p>
			<p>And thereafter Manuel talked with Freydis, confessing that the appearance of these magic-workers troubled Manuel. He had thought it, he said, an admirable thing to make images that lived, until he saw and considered the appearance of these habitual makers of images. They were an ugly and rickety, short-tempered tribe, said Manuel: they were shiftless, spiteful, untruthful, and in everyday affairs not far from imbecile: they plainly despised all persons who could not make images, and they apparently detested all those who could. With Manuel they were particularly high and mighty, assuring him that he was only a prosperous and affected pseudo-magician, and that the harm done by the self-styled thaumaturgist was apt to be very great indeed. What sort of models, then, were these insane, mud-moulding solitary wasps for a tall lad to follow after? And if Manuel acquired their arts (he asked in conclusion), would he acquire their traits?</p>
			<p>“The answer is perhaps no, and not impossibly yes,” replied Freydis. “For by the ancient Tuyla mystery they extract that which is best in them to inform their images, and this is apt to leave them empty of virtue. But I would have you consider that their best endures, whereas that which is best in other persons is obliterated on some battle-field or mattress or gallows That is why I have been thinking that this afternoon⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, we will let that wait a bit, for I must turn this over in my mind,” said Manuel, “and my mature opinion about this matter must be expressed later.”</p>
			<p>But while his thoughts were on the affair his fingers made him droll small images of ten of the image-makers, which he set aside unquickened. Freydis smiled at these caricatures, and asked when Manuel would give them life.</p>
			<p>“Oh, in due time,” he said, “and then their antics may be diverting. But I perceive that this old Tuyla magic is practised at great price and danger, so that I am in no hurry to practise any more of it. I prefer to enjoy that which is dearer and better.”</p>
			<p>“And what can be dearer and better?”</p>
			<p>“Youth,” Manuel answered, “and you.”</p>
			<p>Queen Freydis was now a human woman in all things, so this reply delighted her hearing if not her reason. “Do these two possessions content you, king of my heart?” she asked him very fondly.</p>
			<p>“No,” Manuel said, gazing out across Morven at the cloud-dappled ridges of the Taunenfels, “nor do I look ever to be contented in this world of men.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed the run of men are poor thin-minded creatures, Manuel⁠—”</p>
			<p>He answered, moodily:</p>
			<p>“But I cannot put aside the thought that these men ought to be my fellows and my intimates. Instead, I who am a famed champion go daily in distrust, almost in fear, of these incomprehensible and shatter-pated beings. To every side there is a feeble madness over-busy about long-faced nonsense from which I recoil, who must conceal this shrinking always. There is no hour in my life but I go armored in reserve and in small lies, and in my armor I am lonely. Freydis, you protest deep love for this well-armored Manuel, but what wisdom will reveal to you, or to me either, just what is Manuel? Oh, but I am puzzled by the impermanence and the loneliness and the impotence of this Manuel! Dear Freydis, do not love my body nor my manner of speaking, nor any of the ways that I have in the flesh, for all these transiencies are mortgaged to the worms. And that thought also is a grief⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Let us not speak of these things! Let us not think of anything that is horrid, but only of each other!”</p>
			<p>“But I cannot put aside the thought that I, who for the while exist in this mortgaged body, cannot ever get out to you. Freydis, there is no way in which two persons may meet in this world of men: we can but exchange, from afar, despairing friendly signals, in the sure knowledge they will be misinterpreted. So do we pass, each coming out of a strange woman’s womb, each parodied by the flesh of his parents, each passing futilely, with incommunicative gestures, toward the womb of a strange grave: and in this jostling we find no comradeship. No soul may travel upon a bridge of words. Indeed there is no word for my foiled huge desire to love and to be loved, just as there is no word for the big, the not quite comprehended thought which is moving in me at this moment. But that thought also is a grief⁠—”</p>
			<p>Manuel was still looking at the changing green and purple of the mountains and at the tall clouds trailing northward. The things that he viewed yonder were all gigantic and lovely, and they seemed not to be very greatly bothering about humankind.</p>
			<p>Then Freydis said: “Let us not think too much, dear, in our youth. It is such a waste of the glad time, and of the youth that will not ever be returning⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But I cannot put aside the thought that it will never be the true Manuel whom you will love or even know of, nor can I dismiss the knowledge that these human senses, through which alone we may obtain any knowledge of each other, are lying messengers. What can I ever be to you except flesh and a voice? Nor is this the root of my sorrowing, dear Freydis. For I know that my distrust of all living creatures⁠—oh, even of you, dear Freydis, when I draw you closest⁠—must always be as a wall between us, a low, lasting, firm-set wall which we can never pull down. And I know that I am not really a famed champion, but only a forlorn and lonely inmate of the doubtful castle of my body; and that I, who know not truly what I am, must die in this same doubt and loneliness, behind the strong defences of posturing and bluntness and jovial laughter which I have raised for my protecting. And that thought also is a grief.”</p>
			<p>Now Manuel was as Freydis had not ever seen him. She wondered at him, she was perturbed by this fine lad’s incomprehensible dreariness, with soft red willing lips so near: and her dark eyes were bent upon him with a beautiful and tender yearning which may not be told.</p>
			<p>“I do not understand you, my dearest,” said she, who was no longer the high Queen of Audela, but a mortal woman. “It is true that all the world about us is a false seeming, but you and I are real and utterly united, for we have no concealments from each other. I am sure that no two people could be happier than we are, nor better suited. And certainly such morbid notions are not like you, who, as you said yourself, only the other day, are naturally so frank and downright.”</p>
			<p>Now Manuel’s thoughts came back from the clouds and the green and purple of the mountains. He looked at her very gravely for an instant or two. He laughed morosely. He said, “There!”</p>
			<p>“But, dearest, you are strange and not yourself⁠—</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes!” says Manuel, kissing her, “for the moment I had forgotten to be frank and downright, and all else which you expect of me. Now I am my old candid, jovial, blunt self again, and I shall not worry you with such silly notions any more. No, I am Manuel: I follow after my own thinking and my own desire; and if to do that begets loneliness I must endure it”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
