<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI: Economics of Math</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Economics of Math</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>What forthwith happened at the pool of Haranton is not nicely adapted to exact description, but it was sufficiently curious to give Manuel’s thoughts a new turn, although it did not seem, even so, to make them happy thoughts. Certainly it was not with any appearance of merriment that Manuel returned to his half-sister Math, who was the miller’s wife.</p>
			<p>“And wherever have you been all this week?” says Math, “with the pigs rooting all over creation, and with that man of mine forever flinging your worthlessness in my face, and with that red-haired Suskind coming out of the twilight a-seeking after you every evening and pestering me with her soft lamentations? And for the matter of that, whatever are you glooming over?”</p>
			<p>“I have cause, and cause to spare.”</p>
			<p>Manuel told her of his adventures upon Vraidex, and Math said that showed what came of neglecting his proper business, which was attendance on her husband’s pigs. Manuel then told her of what had just befallen by the pool of Haranton.</p>
			<p>Math nodded. “Take shame to yourself, young rascal with your Niafer hardly settled down in paradise, and with your Suskind wailing for you in the twilight! But that would be Alianora the Unattainable Princess. Thus she comes across the Bay of Biscay, traveling from the far land of Provence, in, they say, the appearance of a swan: and thus she bathes in the pool wherein strange dreams engender: and thus she slips into the robe of the Apsarasas when it is high time to be leaving such impudent knaves as you have proved yourself to be.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes! a shift made all of shining white feathers, Sister. Here is a feather that was broken from it as I clutched at her.”</p>
			<p>Math turned the feather in her hand. “Now to be sure! and did you ever see the like of it! Still, a broken feather is no good to anybody, and, as I have told you any number of times, I cannot have trash littering up my kitchen.”</p>
			<p>So Math dropped this shining white feather into the fire, on which she was warming over a pot of soup for Manuel’s dinner, and they watched this feather burn.</p>
			<p>Manuel says, sighing, “Even so my days consume, and my youth goes out of me, in a land wherein Suskind whispers of uncomfortable things, and wherein there are no maids so clever and dear as Niafer, nor so lovely as Alianora.”</p>
			<p>Math said: “I never held with speaking ill of the dead. So may luck and fair words go with your Niafer in her pagan paradise. Of your Suskind too”⁠—Math crossed herself⁠—“the less said, the better. But as for your Alianora, no really nice girl would be flying in the face of heaven and showing her ankles to five nations, and bathing, on a Monday too, in places where almost anybody might come along. It is not proper, but I wonder at her parents.”</p>
			<p>“But, Sister, she is a princess!”</p>
			<p>“Just so: therefore I burned the feather, because it is not wholesome for persons of our station in life to be robbing princesses of anything, though it be only of a feather.”</p>
			<p>“Sister, that is the truth! It is not right to rob anybody of anything, and this would appear to make another bond upon me and another obligation to be discharged, because in taking that feather I have taken what did not belong to me.”</p>
			<p>“Boy, do not think you are fooling me, for when your face gets that look on it, I know you are considering some nonsense over and above the nonsense you are talking. However, from your description of the affair, I do not doubt that gallivanting, stark-naked princess thought you were for taking what did not belong to you. Therefore I burned the feather, lest it be recognized and bring you to the gallows or to a worse place. So why did you not scrape your feet before coming into my clean kitchen? and how many times do you expect me to speak to you about that?”</p>
			<p>Manuel said nothing. But he seemed to meditate over something that puzzled him. In the upshot he went into the miller’s chicken yard, and caught a goose, and plucked from its wing a feather.</p>
			<p>Then Manuel put on his Sunday clothes.</p>
			<p>“Far too good for you to be traveling in,” said Math.</p>
			<p>Manuel looked down at his half-sister, and once or twice he blinked those shining strange eyes of his. “Sister, if I had been properly dressed when I was master of the doubtful palace, the Lady Gisèle would have taken me quite seriously. I have been thinking about her observations as to my elbows.”</p>
			<p>“The coat does not make the man,” replied Math piously.</p>
			<p>“It is your belief in any such saying that has made a miller’s wife of you, and will keep you a miller’s wife until the end of time. Now I learned better from my misadventures upon Vraidex, and from my talking with that insane Horvendile about the things which have been and some things which are to be.”</p>
			<p>Math, who was a wise woman, said queerly, “I perceive that you are letting your hair grow.”</p>
			<p>Manuel said, “Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Boy, fast and loose is a mischancy game to play.”</p>
			<p>“And being born, also, is a most hazardous speculation, Sister, yet we perforce risk all upon that cast.”</p>
			<p>“Now you talk stuff and nonsense⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Sister; but I begin to suspect that the right sort of stuff and nonsense is not unremunerative. I may be wrong, but I shall afford my notion a testing.”</p>
			<p>“And after what shiftless idiocy will you be chasing now, to neglect your work?”</p>
			<p>“Why, as always, Sister, I must follow my own thinking and my own desire,” says Manuel, lordlily, “and both of these are for a flight above pigs.”</p>
			<p>Thereafter Manuel kissed Math, and, again without taking leave of Suskind in the twilight, or of anyone else, he set forth for the far land of Provence.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
