<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: Statecraft</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Statecraft</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Now from the ship’s gangway came seven trumpeters dressed in glistening plaids: each led with a silver chain a grayhound, and each of the seven hounds carried in his mouth an apple of gold. After these followed three harp-players and three clergymen and three jesters, all bearing crested staves and wearing chaplets of roses. Then Miramon Lluagor, lord of the nine sleeps and prince of the seven madnesses, comes ashore. An incredible company followed. But with him came his wife Gisèle and their little child Demetrios, thus named for the old Count of Arnaye: and it was this boy that, they say, when yet in swaddling-bands, was appointed to be the slayer of his own father, wise Miramon Lluagor.</p>
			<p>Dame Niafer was wakened, and the two women went apart to compare and discuss their babies. They put the children in one cradle. A great while afterward were these two again to lie together thus, and from this mating was the girl to get long sorrow, and the boy his death.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the snub-nosed lord of the nine sleeps and the squinting Count of Poictesme sat down upon the river bank to talk about more serious matters than croup and teething. The sun was high by this time, so Kan and Muluc and Ix and Cauac came in haste from the corners of the world, and held up a blue canopy to shelter the conferring between their master and Dom Manuel.</p>
			<p>“What is this,” said Miramon Lluagor to Dom Manuel, first of all, “that I hear of your alliance with Philistia, and of your dickerings with a people who say that my finest designs are nothing but indigestion?”</p>
			<p>“I have lost Poictesme,” says Manuel, “and the Philistines offer to support me in my pretensions.”</p>
			<p>“But that will never do! I who design all dreams can never consent to that, and no Philistine must ever enter Poictesme. Why did you not come to me for help at the beginning, instead of wasting time upon kings and queens?” demands the magician, fretfully. “And are you not ashamed to be making any alliance with Philistia, remembering how you used to follow after your own thinking and your own desire?”</p>
			<p>“Well,” Manuel replies, “I have had as yet nothing save fair words from Philistia, and no alliance is concluded.”</p>
			<p>“That is more than well. Only, let us be orderly about this. Imprimis, you desire Poictesme⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, not in particular, but appearances have to be preserved, and my wife thinks it would look better for me to redeem this country from the oppression of the heathen Northmen, and so provide her with a suitable home.”</p>
			<p>“Item, then I must obtain this country for you, because there is no sense in withstanding our wives in such matters.”</p>
			<p>“I rejoice at your decision⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Between ourselves, Manuel, I fancy you now begin to understand the reasons which prompted me to bring you the magic sword Flamberge at the beginning of our acquaintance, and have learned who it is that wears the breeches in most marriages.”</p>
			<p>“No, that is not the way it is at all, Miramon, for my wife is the dearest and most dutiful of women, and never crosses my wishes in anything.”</p>
			<p>Miramon nodded his approval. “You are quite right, for somebody might be overhearing us. So, let us get on, and do you stop interrupting me. Item, you must hold Poictesme, and your heirs forever after must hold Poictesme, not in fee but by feudal tenure. Item, you shall hold these lands, not under any saint like Ferdinand, but under a quite different sort of liege-lord.”</p>
			<p>“I can see no objection to your terms, thus far. But who is to be my overlord?”</p>
			<p>“A person whom you may remember,” replied Miramon, and he beckoned toward the rainbow throng of his followers.</p>
			<p>One of them at this signal came forward. He was a tall lean youngster, with ruddy cheeks, wide-set brown eyes, and a smallish head covered with crisp, tightly-curling dark red hair: and Manuel recognized him at once, because Manuel had every reason to remember the queer talk he had held with this Horvendile just after Niafer had ridden away with Miramon’s dreadful half-brother.</p>
			<p>“But do you not think that this Horvendile is insane?” Dom Manuel asked the magician, privately.</p>
			<p>“I confess he very often has that appearance.”</p>
			<p>“Then why do you make him my overlord?”</p>
			<p>“I have my reasons, you may depend upon it, and if I do not talk about them you may be sure that for this reticence also I have my reasons.”</p>
			<p>“But is this Horvendile, then, one of the Léshy? Is he the Horvendile whose great-toe is the morning star?”</p>
			<p>“I may tell you that it was he who summoned me to help you in distress, of which I had not heard upon Vraidex, but why should I tell you any more, Dom Manuel? Come, is it not enough that am offering you a province and comparatively tranquil terms of living with your wife, that you must have all my old secrets to boot?”</p>
			<p>“You are right,” says Manuel, “and prospective benefactors must be humored.” So he rested content with his ignorance, nor did he ever find out about Horvendile, though later Manuel must have had horrible suspicions.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, Dom Manuel affably shook hands with the redheaded boy, and spoke of their first meeting. “And I believe you were not talking utter foolishness after all, my lad,” says Manuel, laughing, “for I have learned that the strange and dangerous thing which you told me is very often true.”</p>
			<p>“Why, how should I know,” quiet Horvendile replied, “when I am talking foolishness and when not?”</p>
			<p>Manuel said: “Still, I can understand your talking only in part. Well, but it is not right for us to understand our overlords, and, madman or not, I prefer you to Queen Stultitia and her preposterous rose-colored spectacles. So let us proceed in due form, and draw up the articles of our agreement.”</p>
			<p>This was done, and they formally subscribed the terms under which Dom Manuel and the descendants of Dom Manuel were to hold Poictesme perpetually in fief to Horvendile. It was the most secret sort of compact, and to divulge its ten stipulations would even now be most disastrous. So the terms of this compact were not ever made public. Thus all men stayed at no larger liberty to criticize its provisos than his circumstances had granted to Dom Manuel, upon whom marrying had put the obligation to provide, in one way or another way, for his wife and child.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
